## 1
The glory of the One who moves all things
permeates the universe and glows
in one part more and in another less.

I was within the heaven that receives
more of His light; and I saw things that he
who from that height descends, forgets or can

not speak; for nearing its desired end,
our intellect sinks into an abyss
so deep that memory fails to follow it.

Nevertheless, as much as I, within
my mind, could treasure of the holy kingdom
shall now become the matter of my song.

O good Apollo, for this final task
make me the vessel of your excellence,
what you, to merit your loved laurel, ask.

Until this point, one of Parnassus' peaks
sufficed for me; but now I face the test
the agon that is left; I need both crests.

Enter into my breast; within me breathe
the very power you made manifest
when you drew Marsyas out from his limbs' sheath.

O godly force, if you so lend yourself
to me, that I might show the shadow of
the blessed realm inscribed within my mind,

then you would see me underneath the tree
you love; there I shall take as crown the leaves
of which my theme and you shall make me worthy.

So seldom, father, are those garlands gathered
for triumph of a ruler or a poet--
a sign of fault or shame in human wills--

that when Peneian branches can incite
someone to long and thirst for them, delight
must fill the happy Delphic deity.

Great fire can follow a small spark: there may
be better voices after me to pray
to Cyrrha's god for aid--that he may answer.

The lantern of the world approaches mortals
by varied paths; but on that way which links
four circles with three crosses, it emerges

joined to a better constellation and
along a better course, and it can temper
and stamp the world's wax more in its own manner.

Its entry from that point of the horizon
brought morning there and evening here; almost
all of that hemisphere was white--while ours

was dark--when I saw Beatrice turn round
and left, that she might see the sun; no eagle
has ever stared so steadily at it.

And as a second ray will issue from the
first and reascend, much like a pilgrim
who seeks his home again, so on her action,

fed by my eyes to my imagination,
my action drew, and on the sun I set
my sight more than we usually do.

More is permitted to our powers there
than is permitted here, by virtue of
that place, made for mankind as its true home.

I did not bear it long, but not so briefly
as not to see it sparkling round about,
like molten iron emerging from the fire;

and suddenly it seemed that day had been
added to day, as if the One who can
had graced the heavens with a second sun.

The eyes of Beatrice were all intent
on the eternal circles; from the sun,
I turned aside; I set my eyes on her.

In watching her, within me I was changed
as Glaucus changed, tasting the herb that made
him a companion of the other sea gods.

Passing beyond the human cannot be
worded; let Glaucus serve as simile--
until grace grant you the experience.

Whether I only was the part of me
that You created last, You--governing
the heavens--know: it was Your light that raised me.

When that wheel which You make eternal through
the heavens' longing for You drew me with
the harmony You temper and distinguish,

the fire of the sun then seemed to me
to kindle so much of the sky, that rain
or river never formed so broad a lake.

The newness of the sound and the great light
incited me to learn their cause--I was
more keen than I had ever been before.

And she who read me as I read myself,
to quiet the commotion in my mind,
opened her lips before I opened mine

to ask, and she began: "You make yourself
obtuse with false imagining; you can
not see what you would see if you dispelled it.

You are not on the earth as you believe;
but lightning, flying from its own abode,
is less swift than you are, returning home."

While I was freed from my first doubt by these
brief words she smiled to me, I was yet caught
in new perplexity. I said: "I was

content already; after such great wonder,
I rested. But again I wonder how
my body rises past these lighter bodies."

At which, after a sigh of pity, she
settled her eyes on me with the same look
a mother casts upon a raving child,

and she began: "All things, among themselves,
possess an order; and this order is
the form that makes the universe like God.

Here do the higher beings see the imprint
of the Eternal Worth, which is the end
to which the pattern I have mentioned tends.

Within that order, every nature has
its bent, according to a different station,
nearer or less near to its origin.

Therefore, these natures move to different ports
across the mighty sea of being, each
given the impulse that will bear it on.

This impulse carries fire to the moon;
this is the motive force in mortal creatures;
this binds the earth together, makes it one.

Not only does the shaft shot from this bow
strike creatures lacking intellect, but those
who have intelligence, and who can love.

The Providence that has arrayed all this
forever quiets--with Its light--that heaven
in which the swiftest of the spheres revolves;

to there, as toward a destined place, we now
are carried by the power of the bow
that always aims its shaft at a glad mark.

Yet it is true that, even as a shape
may, often, not accord with art's intent,
since matter may be unresponsive, deaf,

so, from this course, the creature strays at times
because he has the power, once impelled,
to swerve elsewhere; as lightning from a cloud

is seen to fall, so does the first impulse,
when man has been diverted by false pleasure,
turn him toward earth. You should--if I am right--

not feel more marvel at your climbing than
you would were you considering a stream
that from a mountain's height falls to its base.

It would be cause for wonder in you if,
no longer hindered, you remained below,
as if, on earth, a living flame stood still."

Then she again turned her gaze heavenward


## 2


O you who are within your little bark,
eager to listen, following behind
my ship that, singing, crosses to deep seas,

turn back to see your shores again: do not
attempt to sail the seas I sail; you may,
by losing sight of me, be left astray.

The waves I take were never sailed before;
Minerva breathes, Apollo pilots me,
and the nine Muses show to me the Bears.

You other few who turned your minds in time
unto the bread of angels, which provides
men here with life--but hungering for more--

you may indeed commit your vessel to
the deep salt--sea, keeping your course within
my wake, ahead of where waves smooth again.

Those men of glory, those who crossed to Colchis,
when they saw Jason turn into a ploughman
were less amazed than you will be amazed.

The thirst that is innate and everlasting--
thirst for the godly realm--bore us away
as swiftly as the heavens that you see.

Beatrice gazed upward. I watched her.
But in a span perhaps no longer than
an arrow takes to strike, to fly, to leave

the bow, I reached a place where I could see
that something wonderful drew me; and she
from whom my need could not be hidden, turned

to me (her gladness matched her loveliness):
"Direct your mind to God in gratefulness,"
she said; "He has brought us to the first star."

It seemed to me that we were covered by
a brilliant, solid, dense, and stainless cloud,
much like a diamond that the sun has struck.

Into itself, the everlasting pearl
received us, just as water will accept
a ray of light and yet remain intact.

If I was body (and on earth we can
not see how things material can share
one space--the case, when body enters body),

then should our longing be still more inflamed
to see that Essence in which we discern
how God and human nature were made one.

What we hold here by faith, shall there be seen,
not demonstrated but directly known,
even as the first truth that man believes.

I answered: "With the most devotion I
can summon, I thank Him who has brought me
far from the mortal world. But now tell me:

what are the dark marks on this planet's body
that there below, on earth, have made men tell
the tale of Cain?" She smiled somewhat, and then

she said: "If the opinion mortals hold
falls into error when the senses' key
cannot unlock the truth, you should not be

struck by the arrows of amazement once
you recognize that reason, even when
supported by the senses, has short wings.

But tell me what you think of it yourself."
And I: "What seems to us diverse up here
is caused--I think--by matter dense and rare."

And she: "You certainly will see that your
belief is deeply sunk in error if
you listen carefully as I rebut it.

The eighth sphere offers many lights to you,
and you can tell that they, in quality
and size, are stars with different visages.

If rarity and density alone
caused this, then all the stars would share one power
distributed in lesser, greater, or

in equal force. But different powers must
be fruits of different formal principles;
were you correct, one only would be left,

the rest, destroyed. And more, were rarity
the cause of the dim spots you question, then
in part this planet would lack matter through

and through, or else as, in a body, lean
and fat can alternate, so would this planet
alternate the pages in its volume.

To validate the first case, in the sun's
eclipse, the light would have to show through, just
as when it crosses matter that is slender.

This is not so; therefore we must consider
the latter case--if I annul that too,
then your opinion surely is confuted.

If rarity does not run through and through
the moon, then there must be a limit where
thickness does not allow the light to pass;

from there, the rays of sun would be thrown back,
just as, from glass that hides lead at its back,
a ray of colored light returns, reflected.

Now you will say that where a ray has been
reflected from a section farther back,
that ray will show itself to be more dim.

Yet an experiment, were you to try it,
could free you from your cavil--and the source
of your arts' course springs from experiment.

Taking three mirrors, place a pair of them
at equal distance from you; set the third
midway between those two, but farther back.

Then, turning toward them, at your back have placed
a light that kindles those three mirrors and
returns to you, reflected by them all.

Although the image in the farthest glass
will be of lesser size, there you will see
that it must match the brightness of the rest.

Now, just as the sub--matter of the snow,
beneath the blows of the warm rays, is stripped
of both its former color and its cold,

so is your mind left bare of error; I
would offer now to you a new form, light
so living that it trembles in your sight.

Within the heaven of the godly peace
revolves a body in whose power lies
the being of all things that it enfolds.

The sphere that follows, where so much is shown,
to varied essences bestows that being,
to stars distinct and yet contained in it.

The other spheres, in ways diverse, direct
the diverse powers they possess, so that
these forces can bear fruit, attain their aims.

So do these organs of the universe
proceed, as you now see, from stage to stage,
receiving from above and acting downward.

Now do attend to how I pass by way
of reason to the truth you want that--then--
you may learn how to cross the ford alone.

The force and motion of the holy spheres
must be inspired by the blessed movers,
just as the smith imparts the hammer's art;

and so, from the deep Mind that makes it wheel,
the sphere that many lights adorn receives
that stamp of which it then becomes the seal.

And as the soul within your dust is shared
by different organs, each most suited to
a different potency, so does that Mind

unfold and multiply its bounty through
the varied heavens, though that Intellect
itself revolves upon its unity.

With the dear body that it quickens and
with which, as life in you, it too is bound,
each different power forms a different compound.

Because of the glad nature of its source,
the power mingled with a sphere shines forth,
as gladness, through the living pupil, shines.

From this, and not from matter rare or dense,
derive the differences from light to light;
this is the forming principle, producing,

conforming with its worth, the dark, the bright."

## 3

That sun which first had warmed my breast with love
had now revealed to me, confuting, proving,
the gentle face of truth, its loveliness;

and I, in order to declare myself
corrected and convinced, lifted my head
as high as my confessional required.

But a new vision showed itself to me;
the grip in which it held me was so fast
that I did not remember to confess.

Just as, returning through transparent, clean
glass, or through waters calm and crystalline
(so shallow that they scarcely can reflect),

the mirrored image of our faces meets
our pupils with no greater force than that
a pearl has when displayed on a white forehead--

so faint, the many faces I saw keen
to speak; thus, my mistake was contrary
to that which led the man to love the fountain.

As soon as I had noticed them, thinking
that what I saw were merely mirrorings,
I turned around to see who they might be;

and I saw nothing; and I let my sight
turn back to meet the light of my dear guide,
who, as she smiled, glowed in her holy eyes.

"There is no need to wonder if I smile,"
she said, "because you reason like a child;
your steps do not yet rest upon the truth;

your mind misguides you into emptiness:
what you are seeing are true substances,
placed here because their vows were not fulfilled.

Thus, speak and listen; trust what they will say:
the truthful light in which they find their peace
will not allow their steps to turn astray."

Then I turned to the shade that seemed most anxious
to speak, and I began as would a man
bewildered by desire too intense:

"O spirit born to goodness, you who feel,
beneath the rays of the eternal life,
that sweetness which cannot be known unless

it is experienced, it would be gracious
of you to let me know your name and fate."
At this, unhesitant, with smiling eyes:

"Our charity will never lock its gates
against just will; our love is like the Love
that would have all Its court be like Itself.

Within the world I was a nun, a virgin;
and if your mind attends and recollects,
my greater beauty here will not conceal me,

and you will recognize me as Piccarda,
who, placed here with the other blessed ones,
am blessed within the slowest of the spheres.

Our sentiments, which only serve the flame
that is the pleasure of the Holy Ghost,
delight in their conforming to His order.

And we are to be found within a sphere
this low, because we have neglected vows,
so that in some respect we were deficient."

And I to her: "Within your wonderful
semblance there is something divine that glows,
transforming the appearance you once showed:

therefore, my recognizing you was slow;
but what you now have told me is of help;
I can identify you much more clearly.

But tell me: though you're happy here, do you
desire a higher place in order to
see more and to be still more close to Him?"

Together with her fellow shades she smiled
at first; then she replied to me with such
gladness, like one who burns with love's first flame:

"Brother, the power of love appeases our
will so--we only long for what we have;
we do not thirst for greater blessedness.

Should we desire a higher sphere than ours,
then our desires would be discordant with
the will of Him who has assigned us here,

but you'll see no such discord in these spheres;
to live in love is--here--necessity,
if you think on love's nature carefully.

The essence of this blessed life consists
in keeping to the boundaries of God's will,
through which our wills become one single will;

so that, as we are ranged from step to step
throughout this kingdom, all this kingdom wills
that which will please the King whose will is rule.

And in His will there is our peace: that sea
to which all beings move--the beings He
creates or nature makes--such is His will."

Then it was clear to me how every place
in Heaven is in Paradise, though grace
does not rain equally from the High Good.

But just as, when our hunger has been sated
with one food, we still long to taste the other--
while thankful for the first, we crave the latter--

so was I in my words and in my gestures,
asking to learn from her what was the web
of which her shuttle had not reached the end.

"A perfect life," she said, "and her high merit
enheaven, up above, a woman whose
rule governs those who, in your world, would wear

nuns' dress and veil, so that, until their death,
they wake and sleep with that Spouse who accepts
all vows that love conforms unto His pleasure.

Still young, I fled the world to follow her;
and, in her order's habit, I enclosed
myself and promised my life to her rule.

Then men more used to malice than to good
took me--violently--from my sweet cloister:
God knows what, after that, my life became.

This other radiance that shows itself
to you at my right hand, a brightness kindled
by all the light that fills our heaven--she

has understood what I have said: she was
a sister, and from her head, too, by force,
the shadow of the sacred veil was taken.

But though she had been turned back to the world
against her will, against all honest practice,
the veil upon her heart was never loosed.

This is the splendor of the great Costanza,
who from the Swabians' second gust engendered
the one who was their third and final power."

This said, she then began to sing "Ave
Maria" and, while singing, vanished as
a weighty thing will vanish in deep water.

My sight, which followed her as long as it
was able to, once she was out of view,
returned to where its greater longing lay,

and it was wholly bent on Beatrice;
but she then struck my eyes with so much brightness
that I, at first, could not withstand her force;

and that made me delay my questioning.

## 4

Before a man bit into one of two
foods equally removed and tempting, he
would die of hunger if his choice were free;

so would a lamb stand motionless between
the cravings of two savage wolves, in fear
of both; so would a dog between two deer;

thus, I need neither blame nor praise myself
when both my doubts compelled me equally:
what kept me silent was necessity.

I did not speak, but in my face were seen
longing and questioning, more ardent than
if spoken words had made them evident.

Then Beatrice did just as Daniel did,
when he appeased Nebuchadnezzar's anger,
the rage that made the king unjustly fierce.

She said: "I see how both desires draw you,
so that your anxiousness to know is self--
entangled and cannot express itself.

You reason: 'If my will to good persists,
why should the violence of others cause
the measure of my merit to be less?'

And you are also led to doubt because
the doctrine Plato taught would find support
by souls' appearing to return to the stars.

These are the questions that, within your will,
press equally for answers; therefore, I
shall treat the most insidious question first.

Neither the Seraph closest unto God,
nor Moses, Samuel, nor either John--
whichever one you will -- nor Mary has,

I say, their place in any other heaven
than that which houses those souls you just saw,
nor will their blessedness last any longer.

But all those souls grace the Empyrean;
and each of them has gentle life -- though some
sense the Eternal Spirit more, some less.

They showed themselves to you here not because
this is their sphere, but as a sign for you
that in the Empyrean their place is lowest.

Such signs are suited to your mind, since from
the senses only can it apprehend
what then becomes fit for the intellect.

And this is why the Bible condescends
to human powers, assigning feet and hands
to God, but meaning something else instead.

And Gabriel and Michael and the angel
who healed the eyes of Tobit are portrayed
by Holy Church with human visages.

That which Timaeus said in reasoning
of souls does not describe what you have seen,
since it would seem that as he speaks he thinks.

He says the soul returns to that same star
from which -- so he believes -- it had been taken
when nature sent that soul as form to body;

but his opinion is, perhaps, to be
taken in other guise than his words speak,
intending something not to be derided.

If to these spheres he wanted to attribute
honor and blame for what they influence,
perhaps his arrow reaches something true.

This principle, ill -- understood, misled
almost all of the world once, so that Jove
and Mercury and Mars gave names to stars.

The other doubt that agitates you is
less poisonous; for its insidiousness
is not such as to lead you far from me.

To mortal eyes our justice seems unjust;
that this is so, should serve as evidence
for faith -- not heresy's depravity.

But that your intellect may penetrate
more carefully into your other query,
I shall -- as you desire -- explain it clearly.

If violence means that the one who suffers
has not abetted force in any way,
then there is no excuse these souls can claim:

for will, if it resists, is never spent,
but acts as nature acts when fire ascends,
though force -- a thousand times -- tries to compel.

So that, when will has yielded much or little,
it has abetted force -- as these souls did:
they could have fled back to their holy shelter.

Had their will been as whole as that which held
Lawrence fast to the grate and that which made
of Mucius one who judged his own hand, then

once freed, they would have willed to find the faith
from which they had been dragged; but it is all
too seldom that a will is so intact.

And through these words, if you have grasped their bent,
you can eliminate the argument
that would have troubled you again -- and often.

But now another obstacle obstructs
your sight; you cannot overcome it by
yourself -- it is too wearying to try.

I've set it in your mind as something certain
that souls in blessedness can never lie,
since they are always near the Primal Truth.

But from Piccarda you were also able
to hear how Constance kept her love of the veil:
and here Piccarda seems to contradict me.

Before this -- brother -- it has often happened
that, to flee menace, men unwillingly
did what should not be done; so did Alcmaeon,

to meet the wishes of his father, kill
his mother -- not to fail in filial
piety, he acted ruthlessly.

At that point -- I would have you see -- the forcea
to which one yielded mingles with one's will;
and no excuse can pardon their joint act.

Absolute will does not concur in wrong;
but the contingent will, through fear that its
resistance might bring greater harm, consents.

Therefore, Piccarda means the absolute
will when she speaks, and I the relative;
so that the two of us have spoken truth. "

Such was the rippling of the holy stream
issuing from the fountain from which springs
all truth: it set to rest both of my longings.

Then I said: "O beloved of the First
Lover, o you -- divine -- whose speech so floods
and warms me that I feel more and more life,

however deep my gratefulness, it can
not match your grace with grace enough; but He
who sees and can -- may He grant recompense.

I now see well: we cannot satisfy
our mind unless it is enlightened by
the truth beyond whose boundary no truth lies.

Mind, reaching that truth, rests within it as
a beast within its lair; mind can attain
that truth -- if not, all our desires were vain.

Therefore, our doubting blossoms like a shoot
out from the root of truth; this natural
urge spurs us toward the peak, from height to height.

Lady, my knowing why we doubt, invites,
sustains, my reverent asking you about
another truth that is obscure to me.

I want to know if, in your eyes, one can
amend for unkept vows with other acts--
good works your balance will not find too scant. "

Then Beatrice looked at me with eyes so full
of sparks of love, eyes so divine that my
own force of sight was overcome, took flight,

and, eyes downcast, I almost lost my senses.

## 5
"If in the fire of love I seem to flame
beyond the measure visible on earth,
so that I overcome your vision's force,

you need not wonder; I am so because
of my perfected vision--as I grasp
the good, so I approach the good in act.

Indeed I see that in your intellect
now shines the never--ending light; once seen,
that light, alone and always, kindles love;

and if a lesser thing allure your love,
it is a vestige of that light which--though
imperfectly--gleams through that lesser thing.

You wish to know if, through a righteous act,
one can repair a promise unfulfilled,
so that the soul and God are reconciled."

So Beatrice began this canto, and
as one who does not interrupt her speech,
so did her holy reasoning proceed:

"The greatest gift the magnanimity
of God, as He created, gave, the gift
most suited to His goodness, gift that He

most prizes, was the freedom of the will;
those beings that have intellect--all these
and none but these--received and do receive

this gift: thus you may draw, as consequence,
the high worth of a vow, when what is pledged
with your consent encounters God's consent;

for when a pact is drawn between a man
and God, then through free will, a man gives up
what I have called his treasure, his free will.

What, then, can be a fitting compensation?
To use again what you had offered, would
mean seeking to do good with ill--got gains.

By now you understand the major point;
but since the Holy Church gives dispensations--
which seems in contrast with the truth I stated--

you need to sit at table somewhat longer:
the food that you have taken was tough food--
it still needs help, if you are to digest it.

Open your mind to what I shall disclose,
and hold it fast within you; he who hears,
but does not hold what he has heard, learns nothing.

Two things are of the essence when one vows
a sacrifice: the matter of the pledge
and then the formal compact one accepts.

This last can never be annulled until
the compact is fulfilled: it is of this
that I have spoken to you so precisely.

Therefore, the Hebrews found it necessary
to bring their offerings, although--as you
must know--some of their offerings might be altered.

As for the matter of the vow--discussed
above--it may be such that if one shifts
to other matter, one commits no sin.

But let none shift the burden on his shoulder
through his own judgment, without waiting for
the turning of the white and yellow keys;

and let him see that any change is senseless,
unless the thing one sets aside can be
contained in one's new weight, as four in six.

Thus, when the matter of a vow has so
much weight and worth that it tips every scale,
no other weight can serve as substitute.

Let mortals never take a vow in jest;
be faithful and yet circumspect, not rash
as Jephthah was, in offering his first gift;

he should have said, ‘I did amiss,' and not
done worse by keeping faith. And you can find
that same stupidity in the Greeks' chief--

when her fair face made Iphigenia grieve
and made the wise and made the foolish weep
for her when they heard tell of such a rite.

Christians, proceed with greater gravity:
do not be like a feather at each wind,
nor think that all immersions wash you clean.

You have both Testaments, the Old and New,
you have the shepherd of the Church to guide you;
you need no more than this for your salvation.

If evil greed would summon you elsewhere,
be men, and not like sheep gone mad, so that
the Jew who lives among you not deride you!

Do not act like the foolish, wanton lamb
that leaves its mother's milk and, heedless, wants
to war against--and harm--its very self!"

These words of Beatrice I here transcribe;
and then she turned--her longing at the full--
to where the world is more alive with light.

Her silence and the change in her appearance
imposed a silence on my avid mind,
which now was ready to address new questions;

and even as an arrow that has struck
the mark before the bow--cord comes to rest,
so did we race to reach the second realm.

When she had passed into that heaven's light,
I saw my lady filled with so much gladness
that, at her joy, the planet grew more bright.

And if the planet changed and smiled, what then
did I--who by my very nature am
given to every sort of change--become?

As in a fish--pool that is calm and clear,
the fish draw close to anything that nears
from outside, if it seems to be their fare,

such were the far more than a thousand splendors
I saw approaching us, and each declared:
"Here now is one who will increase our loves."

And even as each shade approached, one saw,
because of the bright radiance it sent forth,
the joyousness with which that shade was filled.

Consider, reader, what your misery
and need to know still more would be if, at
this point, what I began did not go on;

and you will--unassisted--feel how I
longed so to hear those shades narrate their state
as soon as they appeared before my eyes.

"O you born unto gladness, whom God's grace
allows to see the thrones of the eternal
triumph before your war of life is ended,

the light that kindles us is that same light
which spreads through all of heaven; thus, if you
would know us, sate yourself as you may please."

So did one of those pious spirits speak
to me. And Beatrice then urged: "Speak, speak
confidently; trust them as you trust gods."

"I see--plainly--how you have nested in
your own light; see--you draw it from your eyes--
because it glistens even as you smile;

but I do not know who you are or why,
good soul, your rank is in a sphere concealed
from mortals by another planet's rays."

I said this as I stood turned toward the light
that first addressed me; and at this, it glowed
more radiantly than it had before.

Just as the sun, when heat has worn away
thick mists that moderate its rays, conceals
itself from sight through an excess of light,

so did that holy form, through excess gladness,
conceal himself from me within his rays;
and so concealed, concealed, he answered me

even as the next canto is to sing.

## 6

"After Constantine had turned the Eagle
counter to heaven's course, the course it took
behind the ancient one who wed Lavinia,

one hundred and one hundred years and more,
the bird of God remained near Europe's borders,
close to the peaks from which it first emerged;

beneath the shadow of the sacred wings,
it ruled the world, from hand to hand, until
that governing--changing--became my task.

Caesar I was and am Justinian,
who, through the will of Primal Love I feel,
removed the vain and needless from the laws.

Before I grew attentive to this labor,
I held that but one nature--and no more--
was Christ's--and in that faith, I was content;

but then the blessed Agapetus, he
who was chief shepherd, with his words turned me
to that faith which has truth and purity.

I did believe him, and now clearly see
his faith, as you with contradictories
can see that one is true and one is false.

As soon as my steps shared the Church's path,
God, of His grace, inspired my high task
as pleased Him. I was fully drawn to that.

Entrusting to my Belisarius
my arms, I found a sign for me to rest
from war: Heaven's right hand so favored him.

My answer to the question you first asked
ends here, and yet the nature of this answer
leads me to add a sequel, so that you

may see with how much reason they attack
the sacred standard--those who seem to act
on its behalf and those opposing it.

See what great virtue made that Eagle worthy
of reverence, beginning from that hour
when Pallas died that it might gain a kingdom.

You know that for three hundred years and more,
it lived in Alba, until, at the end,
three still fought three, contending for that standard.

You know how, under seven kings, it conquered
its neighbors--in the era reaching from
wronged Sabine women to Lucrece's grief--

and what it did when carried by courageous
Romans, who hurried to encounter Brennus,
Pyrrhus, and other principates and cities.

Through this, Torquatus, Quinctius (who is named
for his disheveled hair), the Decii,
and Fabii gained the fame I gladly honor.

That standard brought the pride of Arabs low
when they had followed Hannibal across
those Alpine rocks from which, Po, you descend.

Beneath that standard, Scipio, Pompey--
though young--triumphed; and to that hill beneath
which you were born, that standard seemed most harsh.

Then, near the time when Heaven wished to bring
all of the world to Heaven's way--serene--
Caesar, as Rome had willed, took up that standard.

And what it did from Var to Rhine was seen
by the Isere, Saone, and Seine and all
the valley--floors whose rivers feed the Rhone.

And what it did, once it had left Ravenna
and leaped the Rubicon, was such a flight
as neither tongue nor writing can describe.

That standard led the legions on to Spain,
then toward Durazzo, and it struck Pharsalia
so hard that the warm Nile could feel that hurt.

It saw again its source, Antandros and
Simois, and the place where Hector lies;
then roused itself--the worse for Ptolemy.

From Egypt, lightning--like, it fell on Juba;
and then it hurried to the west of you,
where it could hear the trumpet of Pompey.

Because of what that standard did, with him
who bore it next, Brutus and Cassius howl
in Hell, and grief seized Modena, Perugia.

Because of it, sad Cleopatra weeps
still; as she fled that standard, from the asp
she drew a sudden and atrocious death.

And, with that very bearer, it then reached
the Red Sea shore: with him, that emblem brought
the world such peace that Janus' shrine was shut.

But what the standard that has made me speak
had done before or then was yet to do
throughout the mortal realm where it holds rule,

comes to seem faint and insignificant
if one, with clear sight and pure sentiment,
sees what it did in the third Caesar's hand;

for the true Justice that inspires me
granted to it--in that next Caesar's hand-
the glory of avenging His own wrath.

Now marvel here at what I show to you:
with Titus--afterward--it hurried toward
avenging vengeance for the ancient sin.

And when the Lombard tooth bit Holy Church,
then Charlemagne, under the Eagle's wings,
through victories he gained, brought help to her.

Now you can judge those I condemned above,
and judge how such men have offended, have
become the origin of all your evils.

For some oppose the universal emblem
with yellow lilies; others claim that emblem
for party: it is hard to see who is worse.

Let Ghibellines pursue their undertakings
beneath another sign, for those who sever
this sign and justice are bad followers.

And let not this new Charles strike at it with
his Guelphs--but let him fear the claws that stripped
a more courageous lion of its hide.

The sons have often wept for a father's fault;
and let this son not think that God will change
the emblem of His force for Charles's lilies.

This little planet is adorned with spirits
whose acts were righteous, but who acted for
the honor and the fame that they would gain:

and when desires tend toward earthly ends,
then, so deflected, rays of the true love
mount toward the life above with lesser force.

But part of our delight is measuring
rewards against our merit, and we see
that our rewards are neither less nor more.

Thus does the Living Justice make so sweet
the sentiments in us, that we are free
of any turning toward iniquity.

Differing voices join to sound sweet music;
so do the different orders in our life
render sweet harmony among these spheres.

And in this very pearl there also shines
the light of Romeo, of one whose acts,
though great and noble, met ungratefulness.

And yet those Provencals who schemed against him
had little chance to laugh, for he who finds
harm to himself in others' righteous acts

takes the wrong path. Of Raymond Berenger's
four daughters, each became a queen--and this,
poor and a stranger, Romeo accomplished.

Then Berenger was moved by vicious tongues
to ask this just man for accounting--one
who, given ten, gave Raymond five and seven.

And Romeo, the poor, the old, departed;
and were the world to know the heart he had
while begging, crust by crust, for his life--bread,

it--though it praise him now--would praise him more."

## 7

"Hosanna, sanctus Deus sabaoth,
superillustrans claritate tua
felices ignes horum malacoth!"

Thus, even as he wheeled to his own music,
I saw that substance sing, that spirit--flame
above whom double lights were twinned; and he

and his companions moved within their dance,
and as if they were swiftest sparks, they sped
out of my sight because of sudden distance.

I was perplexed, and to myself, I said:
"Tell her! Tell her! Tell her, the lady who
can slake my thirst with her sweet drops"; and yet

the reverence that possesses all of me,
even on hearing only Be and ice,
had bowed my head--I seemed a man asleep.

But Beatrice soon ended that; for she
began to smile at me so brightly that,
even in fire, a man would still feel glad.

"According to my never--erring judgment,
the question that perplexes you is how
just vengeance can deserve just punishment;

but I shall quickly free your mind from doubt;
and listen carefully; the words I speak
will bring the gift of a great truth in reach.

Since he could not endure the helpful curb
on his willpower, the man who was not born,
damning himself, damned all his progeny.

For this, mankind lay sick, in the abyss
of a great error, for long centuries,
until the Word of God willed to descend

to where the nature that was sundered from
its Maker was united to His person
by the sole act of His eternal Love.

Now set your sight on what derives from that.
This nature, thus united to its Maker,
was good and pure, even as when created;

but in itself, this nature had been banished
from paradise, because it turned aside
from its own path, from truth, from its own life.

Thus, if the penalty the Cross inflicted
is measured by the nature He assumed,
no one has ever been so justly stung;

yet none was ever done so great a wrong,
if we regard the Person made to suffer,
He who had gathered in Himself that nature.

Thus, from one action, issued differing things:
God and the Jews were pleased by one same death;
earth trembled for that death and Heaven opened.

You need no longer find it difficult
to understand when it is said that just
vengeance was then avenged by a just court.

But I now see your understanding tangled
by thought on thought into a knot, from which,
with much desire, your mind awaits release.

You say: ‘What I have heard is clear to me;
but this is hidden from me--why God willed
precisely this pathway for our redemption.'

Brother, this ordinance is buried from
the eyes of everyone whose intellect
has not matured within the flame of love.

Nevertheless, since there is much attempting
to find this point, but little understanding,
I shall tell why that way was the most fitting.

The Godly Goodness that has banished every
envy from Its own Self, burns in Itself;
and sparkling so, It shows eternal beauties.

All that derives directly from this Goodness
is everlasting, since the seal of Goodness
impresses an imprint that never alters.

Whatever rains from It immediately
is fully free, for it is not constrained
by any influence of other things.

Even as it conforms to that Goodness,
so does it please It more; the Sacred Ardor
that gleams in all things is most bright within

those things most like Itself. The human being
has all these gifts, but if it loses one,
then its nobility has been undone.

Only man's sin annuls man's liberty,
makes him unlike the Highest Good, so that,
in him, the brightness of Its light is dimmed;

and man cannot regain his dignity
unless, where sin left emptiness, man fills
that void with just amends for evil pleasure.

For when your nature sinned so totally
within its seed, then, from these dignities,
just as from Paradise, that nature parted;

and they could never be regained--if you
consider carefully--by any way
that did not pass across one of these fords:

either through nothing other than His mercy,
God had to pardon man, or of himself
man had to proffer payment for his folly.

Now fix your eyes on the profundity
of the Eternal Counsel; heed as closely
as you are able to, my reasoning.

Man, in his limits, could not recompense;
for no obedience, no humility,
he offered later could have been so deep

that it could match the heights he meant to reach
through disobedience; man lacked the power
to offer satisfaction by himself.

Thus there was need for God, through His own ways,
to bring man back to life intact--I mean
by one way or by both. But since a deed

pleases its doer more, the more it shows
the goodness of the heart from which it springs,
the Godly Goodness that imprints the world

was happy to proceed through both Its ways
to raise you up again. Nor has there been,
nor will there be, between the final night

and the first day, a chain of actions so
lofty and so magnificent as He
enacted when He followed His two ways;

for God showed greater generosity
in giving His own self that man might be
able to rise, than if He simply pardoned;

for every other means fell short of justice,
except the way whereby the Son of God
humbled Himself when He became incarnate.

Now to give all your wishes full content,
I go back to explain one point, so that
you, too, may see it plainly, as I do.

You say: ‘I see that water, see that fire
and air and earth and all that they compose
come to corruption, and endure so briefly;

and yet these, too, were things created; if
what has been said above is true, then these
things never should be subject to corruption.'

Brother, the angels and the pure country
where you are now--these may be said to be
created, as they are, in all their being;

whereas the elements that you have mentioned,
as well as those things that are made from them,
receive their form from a created power.

The matter they contain had been created,
just as within the stars that wheel about them,
the power to give form had been created.

The rays and motion of the holy lights
draw forth the soul of every animal
and plant from matter able to take form;

but your life is breathed forth immediately
by the Chief Good, who so enamors it
of His own Self that it desires Him always.

So reasoning, you also can deduce
your resurrection; you need but remember
the way in which your human flesh was fashioned

when both of the first parents were created."

## 8

The world, when still in peril, thought that, wheeling,
in the third epicycle, Cyprian
the fair sent down her rays of frenzied love,

so that, in ancient error, ancient peoples
not only honored her with sacrifices
and votive cries, but honored, too, Dione

and Cupid, one as mother, one as son
of Cyprian, and told how Cupid sat
in Dido's lap; and gave the name of her

with whom I have begun this canto, to
the planet that is courted by the sun,
at times behind her and at times in front.

I did not notice my ascent to it,
yet I was sure I was in Venus when
I saw my lady grow more beautiful.

And just as, in a flame, a spark is seen,
and as, in plainsong, voice in voice is heard
one holds the note, the other comes and goes

I saw in that light other wheeling lamps,
some more and some less swift, yet in accord,
I think, with what their inner vision was.

Winds, seen or unseen, never have descended
so swiftly from cold clouds as not to seem
impeded, slow, to any who had seen

those godly lights approaching us, halting
the circling dance those spirits had begun
within the heaven of high Seraphim;

and a Hosanna sounded from within
their front ranks such that I have never been
without desire to hear it sound again.

Then one drew nearer us, and he began
alone: We all are ready at your pleasure,
so that you may receive delight from us.

One circle and one circling and one thirst
are ours as we revolve with the celestial
Princes whom, from the world, you once invoked:

‘You who, through understanding, move the third
heaven.' Our love is so complete to bring
you joy, brief respite will not be less sweet.

After my eyes had turned with reverence
to see my lady, after her consent
had brought them reassurance and content,

they turned back to the light that promised me
so much; and, Tell me, who are you, I asked
in a voice stamped with loving sentiment.

And how much larger, brighter did I see
that spirit grow when, as I spoke, it felt
new gladness added to its gladnesses!

Thus changed, it then replied: The world held me
briefly below; but had my stay been longer,
much evil that will be, would not have been.

My happiness, surrounding me with rays,
keeps me concealed from you; it hides me like
a creature that is swathed in its own silk.

You loved me much and had good cause for that;
for had I stayed below, I should have showed
you more of my love than the leaves alone.

The left bank that the Rhone bathes after it
has mingled with the waters of the Sorgue,
awaited me in due time as its lord,

as did Ausonia's horn, which south of where
the Tronto and the Verde reach the sea
Catona, Bari, and Gaeta border.

Upon my brow a crown already shone
the crown of that land where the Danube flows
when it has left behind its German shores.

And fair Trinacria, whom ashes (these
result from surging sulphur, not Typhoeus)
cover between Pachynus and Pelorus,

along the gulf that Eurus vexes most,
would still await its rulers born through me
from Charles and Rudolph, if ill sovereignty,

which always hurts the heart of subject peoples,
had not provoked Palermo to cry out:
‘Die! Die!' And if my brother could foresee

what ill--rule brings, he would already flee
from Catalonia's grasping poverty,
aware that it may cause him injury;

for truly there is need for either him
or others to prevent his loaded boat
from having to take on still greater loads.

His niggard nature is descended from
one who was generous; and he needs soldiers
who are not bent on filling up their coffers.

My lord, since I believe that you perceive
completely where all good begins and ends
the joy I see within myself on hearing

your words to me, my joy is felt more freely;
and I joy, too, in knowing you are blessed,
since you perceived this as you gazed at God.

You made me glad; so may you clear the doubt
that rose in me when you before described
how from a gentle seed, harsh fruit derives.

These were my words to him, and he replied:
If I can show one certain truth to you,
you will confront what now is at your back.

The Good that moves and makes content the realm
through which you now ascend, makes providence
act as a force in these great heavens' bodies;

and in the Mind that, in itself, is perfect,
not only are the natures of His creatures
but their well--being, too, provided for;

and thus, whatever this bow shoots must fall
according to a providential end,
just like a shaft directed to its target.

Were this not so, the heavens you traverse
would bring about effects in such a way
that they would not be things of art but shards.

That cannot be unless the Minds that move
these planets are defective and, defective,
the First Mind, which had failed to make them perfect.

Would you have this truth still more clear to you?
I: No. I see it is impossible
for nature to fall short of what is needed.

He added: Tell me, would a man on earth
be worse if he were not a citizen?
Yes, I replied, and here I need no proof.

Can there be citizens if men below
are not diverse, with diverse duties? No,
if what your master writes is accurate.

Until this point that shade went on, deducing;
then he concluded: Thus, the roots from which
your tasks proceed must needs be different:

so, one is born a Solon, one a Xerxes,
and one a Melchizedek, and another,
he who flew through the air and lost his son.

Revolving nature, serving as a seal
for mortal wax, plies well its art, but it
does not distinguish one house from another.

Thus, even from the seed, Esau takes leave
of Jacob; and because he had a father
so base, they said Quirinus was Mars' son.

Engendered natures would forever take
the path of those who had engendered them,
did not Divine provision intervene.

Now that which stood behind you, stands in front:
but so that you may know the joy you give me,
I now would cloak you with a corollary.

Where Nature comes upon discrepant fortune,
like any seed outside its proper region,
Nature will always yield results awry.

But if the world below would set its mind
on the foundation Nature lays as base
to follow, it would have its people worthy.

But you twist to religion one whose birth
made him more fit to gird a sword, and make
a king of one more fit for sermoning,

so that the track you take is off the road.

## 9

Fair Clemence, after I had been enlightened
by your dear Charles, he told me how his seed
would be defrauded, but he said: Be silent

and let the years revolve. All I can say
is this: lament for vengeance well-deserved
will follow on the wrongs you are to suffer.

And now the life-soul of that holy light
turned to the Sun that fills it even as
the Goodness that suffices for all things.

Ah, souls seduced and creatures without reverence,
who twist your hearts away from such a Good,
who let your brows be bent on emptiness!

And here another of those splendors moved
toward me; and by its brightening without,
it showed its wish to please me. Beatrice,

whose eyes were fixed on me, as they had been
before, gave me the precious certainty
that she consented to my need to speak.

Pray, blessed spirit, may you remedy
quickly my wish to know, I said. Give me
proof that you can reflect the thoughts I think.

At which that light, one still unknown to me,
out of the depth from which it sang before,
continued as if it rejoiced in kindness:

In that part of indecent Italy
that lies between Rialto and the springs
from which the Brenta and the Piave stream,

rises a hill of no great height from which
a firebrand descended, and it brought
much injury to all the land about.

Both he and I were born of one same root:
Cunizza was my name, and I shine here
because this planet's radiance conquered me.

But in myself I pardon happily
the reason for my fate; I do not grieve
and vulgar minds may find this hard to see.

Of the resplendent, precious jewel that stands
most close to me within--our heaven, much
fame still remains and will not die away

before this hundredth year returns five times:
see then if man should not seek excellence
that his first life bequeath another life.

And this, the rabble that is now enclosed
between the Adige and Tagliamento
does not consider, nor does it repent

despite its scourgings; and since it would shun
its duty, at the marsh the Paduans
will stain the river-course that bathes Vicenza;

and where the Sile and Cagnano flow
in company, one lords it, arrogant;
the net to catch him is already set.

Feltre shall yet lament the treachery
of her indecent shepherd act so filthy
that for the like none ever entered prison.

The vat to hold the blood of the Ferrarese
would be too large indeed, and weary he
who weighs it ounce by ounce the vat that he,

generous priest, will offer up to show
fidelity to his Guelph party; and
such gifts will suit the customs of that land.

Above are mirrors Thrones is what you call them
and from them God in judgment shines on us;
and thus we think it right to say such things.

Here she was silent and appeared to me
to turn toward other things, reentering
the wheeling dance where she had been before.

The other joy, already known to me
as precious, then appeared before my eyes
like a pure ruby struck by the sun's rays.

On high, joy is made manifest by brightness,
as, here on earth, by smiles; but down below,
the shade grows darker when the mind feels sorrow.

God can see all, I said, and, blessed spirit,
your vision is contained in Him, so that
no wish can ever hide itself from you.

Your voice has always made the heavens glad
as has the singing of the pious fires
that make themselves a cowl of their six wings:

why then do you not satisfy my longings?
I would not have to wait for your request
if I could enter you as you do me.

The widest valley into which the waters
spread from the sea that girds the world, his words
began, between discrepant shores, extends

eastward so far against the sun, that when
those waters end at the meridian,
that point when they began was the horizon.

I lived along the shoreline of that valley
between the Ebro and the Magra, whose
brief course divides the Genoese and Tuscans.

Beneath the same sunset, the same sunrise,
lie both Bougie and my own city, which
once warmed its harbor with its very blood.

Those men to whom my name was known, called me
Folco; and even as this sphere receives
my imprint, so was I impressed with its;

for even Belus' daughter, wronging both
Sychaeus and Creusa, did not burn
more than I did, as long as I was young;

nor did the Rhodopean woman whom
Demophoon deceived, nor did Alcides
when he enclosed Iole in his heart.

Yet one does not repent here; here one smiles
not for the fault, which we do not recall,
but for the Power that fashioned and foresaw.

For here we contemplate the art adorned
by such great love, and we discern the good
through which the world above forms that below.

But so that all your longings born within
this sphere may be completely satisfied
when you bear them away, I must continue.

You wish to know what spirit is within
the light that here beside me sparkles so,
as would a ray of sun in limpid water.

Know then that Rahab lives serenely in
that light, and since her presence joins our order,
she seals that order in the highest rank.

This heaven, where the shadow cast by earth
comes to a point, had Rahab as the first
soul to be taken up when Christ triumphed.

And it was right to leave her in this heaven
as trophy of the lofty victory
that Christ won, palm on palm, upon the cross,

for she had favored the initial glory
of Joshua within the Holy Land
which seldom touches the Pope's memory.

Your city, which was planted by that one
who was the first to turn against his Maker,
the one whose envy cost us many tears

produces and distributes the damned flower
that turns both sheep and lambs from the true course,
for of the shepherd it has made a wolf.

For this the Gospel and the great Church Fathers
are set aside and only the Decretals
are studied as their margins clearly show.

On these the pope and cardinals are intent.
Their thoughts are never bent on Nazareth,
where Gabriel's open wings were reverent.

And yet the hill of Vatican as well
as other noble parts of Rome that were
the cemetery for Peter's soldiery

will soon be freed from priests' adultery.

## 10

Gazing upon His Son with that Love which
One and the Other breathe eternally,
the Power--first and inexpressible--

made everything that wheels through mind and space
so orderly that one who contemplates
that harmony cannot but taste of Him.

Then, reader, lift your eyes with me to see
the high wheels; gaze directly at that part
where the one motion strikes against the other;

and there begin to look with longing at
that Master's art, which in Himself he loves
so much that his eye never parts from it.

See there the circle branching from that cross--point
obliquely: zodiac to bear the planets
that satisfy the world in need of them.

For if the planets' path were not aslant,
much of the heavens' virtue would be wasted
and almost every power on earth be dead;

and if the zodiac swerved more or less
far from the straight course, then earth's harmony
would be defective in both hemispheres.

Now, reader, do not leave your bench, but stay
to think on that of which you have foretaste;
you will have much delight before you tire.

I have prepared your fare; now feed yourself,
because that matter of which I am made
the scribe calls all my care unto itself.

The greatest minister of nature--he
who imprints earth with heaven's worth and, with
his light, provides the measurement for time--

since he was in conjunction with the part
I noted, now was wheeling through the spirals
where he appears more early every day.

And I was with him, but no more aware
of the ascent than one can be aware
of any sudden thought before it starts.

The one who guides me so from good to better
is Beatrice, and on our path her acts
have so much swiftness that they span no time.

How bright within themselves must be the lights
I saw on entering the Sun, for they
were known to me by splendor, not by color!

Though I should call on talent, craft, and practice,
my telling cannot help them be imagined;
but you can trust--and may you long to see it.

And if our fantasies fall short before
such heights, there is no need to wonder; for
no eye has seen light brighter than the Sun's.

Such was the sphere of His fourth family,
whom the High Father always satisfies,
showing how He engenders and breathes forth.

And Beatrice began: "Give thanks, give thanks
to Him, the angels' Sun, who, through His grace,
has lifted you to this embodied sun."

No mortal heart was ever so disposed
to worship, or so quick to yield itself
to God with all its gratefulness, as I

was when I heard those words, and all my love
was so intent on Him that Beatrice
was then eclipsed within forgetfulness.

And she was not displeased, but smiled at this,
so that the splendor of her smiling eyes
divided my rapt mind between two objects.

And I saw many lights, alive, most bright;
we formed the center, they became a crown,
their voices even sweeter than their splendor:

just so, at times, we see Latona's daughter
circled when saturated air holds fast
the thread that forms the girdle of her halo.

In Heaven's court, from which I have returned,
one finds so many fair and precious gems
that are not to be taken from that kingdom:

one of those gems, the song those splendors sang.
He who does not take wings to reach that realm,
may wait for tidings of it from the mute.

After those ardent suns, while singing so,
had wheeled three times around us, even as
stars that are close to the fixed poles, they seemed

to me like women who, though not released
from dancing, pause in silence, listening
until new notes invite to new dancing.

And from within one light I heard begin:
"Because the ray of grace, from which true love
is kindled first and then, in loving, grows,

shines with such splendor, multiplied, in you,
that it has led you up the stair that none
descends who will not climb that stair again,

whoever would refuse to quench your thirst
with wine from his flask, would be no more free
than water that does not flow toward the sea.

You want to know what plants bloom in this garland
that, circling, contemplates with love the fair
lady who strengthens your ascent to heaven.

I was a lamb among the holy flock
that Dominic leads on the path where one
may fatten well if one does not stray off.

He who is nearest on my right was both
my brother and my teacher: from Cologne,
Albert, and I am Thomas of Aquino.

If you would know who all the others are,
then even as I speak let your eyes follow,
making their way around the holy wreath.

That next flame issues from the smile of Gratian,
who served one and the other court of law
so well that his work pleases Paradise.

That other, who adorns our choir next--
he was that Peter who, like the poor widow,
offered his treasure to the Holy Church.

The fifth light, and the fairest light among us,
breathes forth such love that all the world below
hungers for tidings of it; in that flame

there is the lofty mind where such profound
wisdom was placed that, if the truth be true,
no other ever rose with so much vision.

Next you can see the radiance of that candle
which, in the flesh, below, beheld most deeply
the angels' nature and their ministry.

Within the other little light there smiles
that champion of the Christian centuries
whose narrative was used by Augustine.

Now, if your mind's eye, following my praising,
was drawn from light to light, you must already
be thirsting for the eighth: within that light,

because he saw the Greatest Good, rejoices
the blessed soul who makes the world's deceit
most plain to all who hear him carefully.

The flesh from which his soul was banished lies
below, within Cieldauro, and he came
from martyrdom and exile to this peace.

Beyond, you see, flaming, the ardent spirits
of Isidore and Bede and Richard--he
whose meditation made him more than man.

This light from whom your gaze returns to me
contains a spirit whose oppressive thoughts
made him see death as coming much too slowly:

it is the everlasting light of Siger,
who when he lectured in the Street of Straw
demonstrated truths that earned him envy."

Then, like a clock that calls us at the hour
in which the Bride of God, on waking, sings
matins to her Bridegroom, encouraging

His love (when each clock--part both drives and draws),
chiming the sounds with notes so sweet that those
with spirit well--disposed feel their love grow;

so did I see the wheel that moved in glory
go round and render voice to voice with such
sweetness and such accord that they can not

be known except where joy is everlasting

## 11

O senseless cares of mortals, how deceiving
are syllogistic reasonings that bring
your wings to flight so low, to earthly things!

One studied law and one the Aphorisms
of the physicians; one was set on priesthood
and one, through force or fraud, on rulership;

one meant to plunder, one to politick;
one labored, tangled in delights of flesh,
and one was fully bent on indolence;

while I, delivered from our servitude
to all these things, was in the height of heaven
with Beatrice, so gloriously welcomed.

After each of those spirits had returned
to that place in the ring where it had been,
it halted, like a candle in its stand.

And from within the splendor that had spoken
to me before, I heard him, as he smiled--
become more radiant, more pure--begin:

"Even as I grow bright within Its rays,
so, as I gaze at the Eternal Light,
I can perceive your thoughts and see their cause.

You are in doubt; you want an explanation
in language that is open and expanded,
so clear that it contents your understanding

of two points: where I said, ‘They fatten well,'
and where I said, ‘No other ever rose'--
and here one has to make a clear distinction.

The Providence that rules the world with wisdom
so fathomless that creatures' intellects
are vanquished and can never probe its depth,

so that the Bride of Him who, with loud cries,
had wed her with His blessed blood, might meet
her Love with more fidelity and more

assurance in herself, on her behalf
commanded that there be two princes, one
on this side, one on that side, as her guides.

One prince was all seraphic in his ardor;
the other, for his wisdom, had possessed
the splendor of cherubic light on earth.

I shall devote my tale to one, because
in praising either prince one praises both:
the labors of the two were toward one goal.

Between Topino's stream and that which flows
down from the hill the blessed Ubaldo chose,
from a high peak there hangs a fertile slope;

from there Perugia feels both heat and cold
at Porta Sole, while behind it sorrow
Nocera and Gualdo under their hard yoke.

From this hillside, where it abates its rise,
a sun was born into the world, much like
this sun when it is climbing from the Ganges.

Therefore let him who names this site not say
Ascesi, which would be to say too little,
but Orient, if he would name it rightly.

That sun was not yet very distant from
his rising, when he caused the earth to take
some comfort from his mighty influence;

for even as a youth, he ran to war
against his father, on behalf of her--
the lady unto whom, just as to death,

none willingly unlocks the door; before
his spiritual court et coram patre,
he wed her; day by day he loved her more.

She was bereft of her first husband; scorned,
obscure, for some eleven hundred years,
until that sun came, she had had no suitor.

Nor did it help her when men heard that he
who made earth tremble found her unafraid--
serene, with Amyclas--when he addressed her;

nor did her constancy and courage help
when she, even when Mary stayed below,
suffered with Christ upon the cross. But so

that I not tell my tale too darkly, you
may now take Francis and take Poverty
to be the lovers meant in my recounting.

Their harmony and their glad looks, their love
and wonder and their gentle contemplation,
served others as a source of holy thoughts;

so much so, that the venerable Bernard
went barefoot first; he hurried toward such peace;
and though he ran, he thought his pace too slow.

O wealth unknown! O good that is so fruitful!
Egidius goes barefoot, and Sylvester,
behind the groom--the bride delights them so.

Then Francis--father, master--goes his way
with both his lady and his family,
the lowly cord already round their waists.

Nor did he lower his eyes in shame because
he was the son of Pietro Bernardone,
nor for the scorn and wonder he aroused;

but like a sovereign, he disclosed in full--
to Innocent--the sternness of his rule;
from him he had the first seal of his order.

And after many of the poor had followed
Francis, whose wondrous life were better sung
by glory's choir in the Empyrean,

the sacred purpose of this chief of shepherds
was then encircled with a second crown
by the Eternal Spirit through Honorius.

And after, in his thirst for martyrdom,
within the presence of the haughty Sultan,
he preached of Christ and those who followed Him.

But, finding hearers who were too unripe
to be converted, he--not wasting time--
returned to harvest the Italian fields;

there, on the naked crag between the Arno
and Tiber, he received the final seal
from Christ; and this, his limbs bore for two years.

When He who destined Francis to such goodness
was pleased to draw him up to the reward
that he had won through his humility,

then to his brothers, as to rightful heirs,
Francis commended his most precious lady,
and he bade them to love her faithfully;

and when, returning to its kingdom, his
bright soul wanted to set forth from her bosom,
it, for its body, asked no other bier.

Consider now that man who was a colleague
worthy of Francis; with him, in high seas,
he kept the bark of Peter on true course.

Such was our patriarch; thus you can see
that those who follow him as he commands,
as cargo carry worthy merchandise.

But now his flock is grown so greedy for
new nourishment that it must wander far,
in search of strange and distant grazing lands;

and as his sheep, remote and vagabond,
stray farther from his side, at their return
into the fold, their lack of milk is greater.

Though there are some indeed who, fearing harm,
stay near the shepherd, they are few in number--
to cowl them would require little cloth.

Now if my words are not too dim and distant,
if you have listened carefully to them,
if you can call to mind what has been said,

then part of what you wish to know is answered,
for you will see the splinters on the plant
and see what my correction meant: ‘Where one

may fatten well, if one does not stray off.'"

## 12

No sooner had the blessed flame begun
to speak its final word than the millstone
of holy lights began to turn, but it

was not yet done with one full revolution
before another ring surrounded it,
and motion matched with motion, song with song--

a song that, sung by those sweet instruments,
surpasses so our Muses and our Sirens
as firstlight does the light that is reflected.

Just as, concentric, like in color, two
rainbows will curve their way through a thin cloud
when Juno has commanded her handmaid,

the outer rainbow echoing the inner,
much like the voice of one--the wandering nymph--
whom love consumed as sun consumes the mist

(and those two bows let people here foretell,
by reason of the pact God made with Noah,
that flood will never strike the world again):

so the two garlands of those everlasting
roses circled around us, and so did
the outer circle mime the inner ring.

When dance and jubilation, festival
of song and flame that answered flame, of light
with light, of gladness and benevolence,

in one same instant, with one will, fell still
(just as the eyes, when moved by their desire,
can only close and open in accord),

then from the heart of one of the new lights
there came a voice, and as I turned toward it,
I seemed a needle turning to the polestar;

and it began: "The love that makes me fair
draws me to speak about the other leader
because of whom my own was so praised here.

Where one is, it is right to introduce
the other: side by side, they fought, so may
they share in glory and together gleam.

Christ's army, whose rearming cost so dearly,
was slow, uncertain of itself, and scanty
behind its ensign, when the Emperor

who rules forever helped his ranks in danger--
only out of His grace and not their merits.
And, as was said, He then sustained His bride,

providing her with two who could revive
a straggling people: champions who would
by doing and by preaching bring new life.

In that part of the West where gentle zephyr
rises to open those new leaves in which
Europe appears reclothed, not far from where,

behind the waves that beat upon the coast,
the sun, grown weary from its lengthy course,
at times conceals itself from all men's eyes--

there, Calaroga, blessed by fortune, sits
under the aegis of the mighty shield
on which the lion loses and prevails.

Within its walls was born the loving vassal
of Christian faith, the holy athlete, one
kind to his own and harsh to enemies;

no sooner was his mind created than
it was so full of living force that it,
still in his mother's womb, made her prophetic.

Then, at the sacred font, where Faith and he
brought mutual salvation as their dowry,
the rites of their espousal were complete.

The lady who had given the assent
for him saw, in a dream, astonishing
fruit that would spring from him and from his heirs.

And that his name might echo what he was,
a spirit moved from here to have him called
by the possessive of the One by whom

he was possessed completely. Dominic
became his name; I speak of him as one
whom Christ chose as the worker in His garden.

He seemed the fitting messenger and servant
of Christ: the very first love that he showed
was for the first injunction Christ had given.

His nurse would often find him on the ground,
alert and silent, in a way that said:
‘It is for this that I have come.' Truly,

his father was Felice and his mother
Giovanna if her name, interpreted,
is in accord with what has been asserted.

Not for the world, for which men now travail
along Taddeo's way or Ostian's,
but through his love of the true manna, he

became, in a brief time, so great a teacher
that he began to oversee the vineyard
that withers when neglected by its keeper.

And from the seat that once was kinder to
the righteous poor (and now has gone astray,
not in itself, but in its occupant),

he did not ask to offer two or three
for six, nor for a vacant benefice,
nor decimas, quae sunt pauperum Dei--

but pleaded for the right to fight against
the erring world, to serve the seed from which
there grew the four--and--twenty plants that ring you.

Then he, with both his learning and his zeal,
and with his apostolic office, like
a torrent hurtled from a mountain source,

coursed, and his impetus, with greatest force,
struck where the thickets of the heretics
offered the most resistance. And from him

there sprang the streams with which the catholic
garden has found abundant watering,
so that its saplings have more life, more green.

If such was one wheel of the chariot
in which the Holy Church, in her defense,
taking the field, defeated enemies

within, then you must see the excellence
of him--the other wheel--whom Thomas praised
so graciously before I made my entry.

And yet the track traced by the outer rim
of that wheel is abandoned now--as in
a cask of wine when crust gives way to mold.

His family, which once advanced with steps
that followed his footprints, has now turned back:
its forward foot now seeks the foot that lags.

And soon we are to see, at harvest time,
the poor grain gathered, when the tares will be
denied a place within the bin--and weep.

I do admit that, if one were to search
our volume leaf by leaf, he might still read
one page with, ‘I am as I always was';

but those of Acquasparta or Casale
who read our Rule are either given to
escaping it or making it too strict.

I am the living light of Bonaventure
of Bagnorea; in high offices
I always put the left--hand interests last.

Illuminato and Augustine are here;
they were among the first unshod poor brothers
to wear the cord, becoming friends of God.

Hugh of St. Victor, too, is here with them;
Peter of Spain, who, with his twelve books, glows
on earth below; and Peter Book--Devourer,

Nathan the prophet, Anselm, and Chrysostom
the Metropolitan, and that Donatus
who deigned to deal with that art which comes first.

Rabanus, too, is here; and at my side
shines the Calabrian Abbot Joachim,
who had the gift of the prophetic spirit.

To this--my praise of such a paladin--
the glowing courtesy and the discerning
language of Thomas urged me on and stirred,

with me, the souls that form this company."


## 13

Let him imagine, who would rightly seize
what I saw now--and let him while I speak
retain that image like a steadfast rock--

in heaven's different parts, those fifteen stars
that quicken heaven with such radiance
as to undo the air's opacities;

let him imagine, too, that Wain which stays
within our heaven's bosom night and day,
so that its turning never leaves our sight;

let him imagine those two stars that form
the mouth of that Horn which begins atop
the axle round which the first wheel revolves;

then see these join to form two signs in heaven--
just like the constellation that was shaped
by Minos' daughter when she felt death's chill--

two signs with corresponding radii,
revolving so that one sign moves in one
direction, and the other in a second;

and he will have a shadow--as it were--
of the true constellation, the double dance
that circled round the point where I was standing:

a shadow--since its truth exceeds our senses,
just as the swiftest of all heavens is
more swift than the Chiana's sluggishness.

They sang no Bacchus there, they sang no Paean,
but sang three Persons in the divine nature,
and in one Person the divine and human.

The singing and the dance fulfilled their measure;
and then those holy lights gave heed to us,
rejoicing as they turned from task to task.

The silence of the blessed fellowship
was broken by the very light from which
I heard the wondrous life of God's poor man;

that light said: "Since one stalk is threshed, and since
its grain is in the granary already,
sweet love leads me to thresh the other stalk.

You think that any light which human nature
can rightfully possess was all infused
by that Force which had shaped both of these two:

the one out of whose chest was drawn the rib
from which was formed the lovely cheek whose palate
was then to prove so costly to the world;

and One whose chest was transfixed by the lance,
who satisfied all past and future sins,
outweighing them upon the scales of justice.

Therefore you wondered at my words when I--
before--said that no other ever vied
with that great soul enclosed in the fifth light.

Now let your eyes hold fast to my reply,
and you will see: truth centers both my speech
and your belief, just like a circle's center.

Both that which never dies and that which dies
are only the reflected light of that
Idea which our Sire, with Love, begets;

because the living Light that pours out so
from Its bright Source that It does not disjoin
from It or from the Love intrined with them,

through Its own goodness gathers up Its rays
within nine essences, as in a mirror,
Itself eternally remaining One.

From there, from act to act, light then descends
down to the last potentialities,
where it is such that it engenders nothing

but brief contingent things, by which I mean
the generated things the moving heavens
bring into being, with or without seed.

The wax of such things and what shapes that wax
are not immutable; and thus, beneath
Idea's stamp, light shines through more or less.

Thus it can be that, in the selfsame species,
some trees bear better fruit and some bear worse,
and men are born with different temperaments.

For were the wax appropriately readied,
and were the heaven's power at its height,
the brightness of the seal would show completely;

but Nature always works defectively--
she passes on that light much like an artist
who knows his craft but has a hand that trembles.

Yet where the ardent Love prepares and stamps
the lucid Vision of the primal Power,
a being then acquires complete perfection.

In that way, earth was once made worthy of
the full perfection of a living being;
thus was the Virgin made to be with child.

So that I do approve of the opinion
you hold: that human nature never was
nor shall be what it was in those two persons.

Now if I said no more beyond this point,
your words might well begin, ‘How is it, then,
with your assertion of his matchless vision?'

But so that the obscure can be made plain,
consider who he was, what was the cause
of his request when he was told, ‘Do ask.'

My words did not prevent your seeing clearly
that it was as a king that he had asked
for wisdom that would serve his royal task--

and not to know the number of the angels
on high or, if combined with a contingent,
necesse ever can produce necesse,

or si est dare primum motum esse,
or if, within a semicircle, one
can draw a triangle with no right angle.

Thus, if you note both what I said and say,
by ‘matchless vision' it is kingly prudence
my arrow of intention means to strike;

and if you turn clear eyes to that word ‘rose,'
you'll see that it referred to kings alone--
kings, who are many, and the good are rare.

Take what I said with this distinction then;
in that way it accords with what you thought
of the first father and of our Beloved.

And let this weigh as lead to slow your steps,
to make you move as would a weary man
to yes or no when you do not see clearly:

whether he would affirm or would deny,
he who decides without distinguishing
must be among the most obtuse of men;

opinion--hasty--often can incline
to the wrong side, and then affection for
one's own opinion binds, confines the mind.

Far worse than uselessly he leaves the shore
(more full of error than he was before)
who fishes for the truth but lacks the art.

Of this, Parmenides, Melissus, Bryson,
are clear proofs to the world, and many others
who went their way but knew not where it went;

so did Sabellius and Arius
and other fools--like concave blades that mirror--
who rendered crooked the straight face of Scriptures.

So, too, let men not be too confident
in judging--witness those who, in the field,
would count the ears before the corn is ripe;

for I have seen, all winter through, the brier
display itself as stiff and obstinate,
and later, on its summit, bear the rose;

and once I saw a ship sail straight and swift
through all its voyaging across the sea,
then perish at the end, at harbor entry.

Let not Dame Bertha or Master Martin think
that they have shared God's Counsel when they see
one rob and see another who donates:

the last may fall, the other may be saved."


## 14

From rim to center, center out to rim,
so does the water move in a round vessel,
as it is struck without, or struck within.

What I am saying fell most suddenly
into my mind, as soon as Thomas's
glorious living flame fell silent, since

between his speech and that of Beatrice,
a similarity was born. And she,
when he was done, was pleased to start with this:

"He does not tell you of it--not with speech
nor in his thoughts as yet--but this man needs
to reach the root of still another truth.

Do tell him if that light with which your soul
blossoms will stay with you eternally
even as it is now; and if it stays,

do tell him how, when you are once again
made visible, it will be possible
for you to see such light and not be harmed."

As dancers in a ring, when drawn and driven
by greater gladness, lift at times their voices
and dance their dance with more exuberance,

so, when they heard that prompt, devout request,
the blessed circles showed new joyousness
in wheeling dance and in amazing song.

Whoever weeps because on earth we die
that we may live on high, has never seen
eternal showers that bring refreshment there.

That One and Two and Three who ever lives
and ever reigns in Three and Two and One,
not circumscribed and circumscribing all,

was sung three times by each and all those souls
with such a melody that it would be
appropriate reward for every merit.

And I could hear within the smaller circle's
divinest light a modest voice (perhaps
much like the angel's voice in speech to Mary)

reply: "As long as the festivity
of Paradise shall be, so long shall our
love radiate around us such a garment.

Its brightness takes its measure from our ardor,
our ardor from our vision, which is measured
by what grace each receives beyond his merit.

When, glorified and sanctified, the flesh
is once again our dress, our persons shall,
in being all complete, please all the more;

therefore, whatever light gratuitous
the Highest Good gives us will be enhanced--
the light that will allow us to see Him;

that light will cause our vision to increase,
the ardor vision kindles to increase,
the brightness born of ardor to increase.

Yet even as a coal engenders flame,
but with intenser glow outshines it, so
that in that flame the coal persists, it shows,

so will the brightness that envelops us
be then surpassed in visibility
by reborn flesh, which earth now covers up.

Nor will we tire when faced with such bright light,
for then the body's organs will have force
enough for all in which we can delight."

One and the other choir seemed to me
so quick and keen to say "Amen" that they
showed clearly how they longed for their dead bodies--

not only for themselves, perhaps, but for
their mothers, fathers, and for others dear
to them before they were eternal flames.

And--look!--beyond the light already there,
an added luster rose around those rings,
even as a horizon brightening.

And even as, at the approach of evening,
new lights begin to show along the sky,
so that the sight seems and does not seem real,

it seemed to me that I began to see
new spirits there, forming a ring beyond
the choirs with their two circumferences.

O the true sparkling of the Holy Ghost--
how rapid and how radiant before
my eyes that, overcome, could not sustain it!

But, smiling, Beatrice then showed to me
such loveliness--it must be left among
the visions that take flight from memory.

From this my eyes regained the strength to look
above again; I saw myself translated
to higher blessedness, alone with my

lady; and I was sure that I had risen
because the smiling star was red as fire--
beyond the customary red of Mars.

With all my heart and in that language which
is one for all, for this new grace I gave
to God my holocaust, appropriate.

Though in my breast that burning sacrifice
was not completed yet, I was aware
that it had been accepted and auspicious;

for splendors, in two rays, appeared to me,
so radiant and fiery that I said:
"O Helios, you who adorn them thus!"

As, graced with lesser and with larger lights
between the poles of the world, the Galaxy
gleams so that even sages are perplexed;

so, constellated in the depth of Mars,
those rays described the venerable sign
a circle's quadrants form where they are joined.

And here my memory defeats my wit:
Christ's flaming from that cross was such that I
can find no fit similitude for it.

But he who takes his cross and follows Christ
will pardon me again for my omission--
my seeing Christ flash forth undid my force.

Lights moved along that cross from horn to horn
and from the summit to the base, and as
they met and passed, they sparkled, radiant:

so, straight and slant and quick and slow, one sees
on earth the particles of bodies, long
and short, in shifting shapes, that move along

the ray of light that sometimes streaks across
the shade that men devise with skill and art
to serve as their defense against the sun.

And just as harp and viol, whose many chords
are tempered, taut, produce sweet harmony
although each single note is not distinct,

so, from the lights that then appeared to me,
out from that cross there spread a melody
that held me rapt, although I could not tell

what hymn it was. I knew it sang high praise,
since I heard "Rise" and "Conquer," but I was
as one who hears but cannot seize the sense.

Yet I was so enchanted by the sound
that until then no thing had ever bound
me with such gentle bonds. My words may seem

presumptuous, as though I dared to deem
a lesser thing the lovely eyes that bring
to my desire, as it gazes, peace.

But he who notes that, in ascent, her eyes--
all beauty's living seals--gain force, and notes
that I had not yet turned to them in Mars,

can then excuse me--just as I accuse
myself, thus to excuse myself--and see
that I speak truly: here her holy beauty

is not denied--ascent makes it more perfect.

## 15

Generous will -- in which is manifest
always the love that breathes toward righteousness,
as in contorted will is greediness--

imposing silence on that gentle lyre,
brought quiet to the consecrated chords
that Heaven's right hand slackens and draws taut.

Can souls who prompted me to pray to them,
by falling silent all in unison,
be deaf to men's just prayers? Then he may grieve

indeed and endlessly -- the man who leaves
behind such love and turns instead to seek
things that do not endure eternally.

As, through the pure and tranquil skies of night,
at times a sudden fire shoots, and moves
eyes that were motionless -- a fire that seems

a star that shifts its place, except that in
that portion of the heavens where it flared,
nothing is lost, and its own course is short--

so, from the horn that stretches on the right,
down to the foot of that cross, a star ran
out of the constellation glowing there;

nor did that gem desert the cross's track,
but coursed along the radii, and seemed
just like a flame that alabaster screens.

With such affection did Anchises' shade
reach out (if we may trust our greatest muse)
when in Elysium he saw his son.

"O blood of mine -- o the celestial grace
bestowed beyond all measure -- unto whom
as unto you was Heaven's gate twice opened?"

That light said this; at which, I stared at him.
Then, looking back to see my lady, I,
on this side and on that, was stupefied;

for in the smile that glowed within her eyes,
I thought that I -- with mine -- had touched the height
of both my blessedness and paradise.

Then -- and he was a joy to hear and see--
that spirit added to his first words things
that were too deep to meet my understanding.

Not that he chose to hide his sense from me;
necessity compelled him; he conceived
beyond the mark a mortal mind can reach.

And when his bow of burning sympathy
was slack enough to let his speech descend
to meet the limit of our intellect,

these were the first words where I caught the sense:
"Blessed be you, both Three and One, who show
such favor to my seed." And he continued:

"The long and happy hungering I drew
from reading that great volume where both black
and white are never changed, you -- son -- have now

appeased within this light in which I speak
to you; for this, I owe my gratitude
to her who gave you wings for your high flight.

You think your thoughts flow into me from Him
who is the First -- as from the number one,
the five and six derive, if one is known--

and so you do not ask me who I am
and why I seem more joyous to you than
all other spirits in this festive throng.

Your thought is true, for both the small and great
of this life gaze into that mirror where,
before you think, your thoughts have been displayed.

But that the sacred love in which I keep
my vigil with unending watchfulness,
the love that makes me thirst with sweet desire,

be better satisfied, let your voice -- bold,
assured, and glad -- proclaim your will and longing,
to which my answer is decreed already. "

I turned to Beatrice, but she heard me
before I spoke; her smile to me was signal
that made the wings of my desire grow.

Then I began: "As soon as you beheld
the First Equality, both intellect
and love weighed equally for each of you,

because the Sun that brought you light and heat
possesses heat and light so equally
that no thing matches His equality;

whereas in mortals, word and sentiment--
to you, the cause of this is evident--
are wings whose featherings are disparate.

I -- mortal -- feel this inequality;
thus, it is only with my heart that I
can offer thanks for your paternal greeting

Indeed I do beseech you, living topaz,
set in this precious jewel as a gem:
fulfill my longing -- let me know your name. "

"O you, my branch in whom I took delight
even awaiting you, I am your root,"
so he, in his reply to me, began,

then said: "The man who gave your family
its name, who for a century and more
has circled the first ledge of Purgatory,

was son to me and was your great -- grandfather;
it is indeed appropriate for you
to shorten his long toil with your good works.

Florence, within her ancient ring of walls--
that ring from which she still draws tierce and nones--
sober and chaste, lived in tranquility.

No necklace and no coronal were there,
and no embroidered gowns; there was no girdle
that caught the eye more than the one who wore it.

No daughter's birth brought fear unto her father,
for age and dowry then did not imbalance--
to this side and to that -- the proper measure.

There were no families that bore no children;
and Sardanapalus was still a stranger--
not come as yet to teach in the bedchamber.

Not yet had your Uccellatoio's rise
outdone the rise of Monte Mario,
which, too, will be outdone in its decline.

I saw Bellincione Berti girt
with leather and with bone, and saw his wife
come from her mirror with her face unpainted.

I saw dei Nerli and del Vecchio
content to wear their suits of unlined skins,
and saw their wives at spindle and at spool.

O happy wives! Each one was sure of her
own burial place, and none -- for France's sake--
as yet was left deserted in her bed.

One woman watched with loving care the cradle
and, as she soothed her infant, used the way
of speech with which fathers and mothers play;

another, as she drew threads from the distaff,
would tell, among her household, tales of Trojans,
and tales of Fiesole, and tales of Rome.

A Lapo Salterello, a Cianghella,
would then have stirred as much dismay as now
a Cincinnatus and Cornelia would.

To such a life -- so tranquil and so lovely--
of citizens in true community,
into so sweet a dwelling place did Mary,

invoked in pains of birth, deliver me;
and I, within your ancient Baptistery,
at once became Christian and Cacciaguida.

Moronto was my brother, and Eliseo;
my wife came from the valley of the Po--
the surname that you bear was brought by her.

In later years I served the Emperor
Conrad -- and my good works so gained his favor
that he gave me the girdle of his knighthood.

I followed him to war against the evil
of that law whose adherents have usurped--
this, through your Pastors' fault -- your just possessions.

There, by that execrable race, I was
set free from fetters of the erring world,
the love of which defiles so many souls.

From martyrdom I came unto this peace. "


## 16

If here below, where sentiment is far
too weak to withstand error, I should see
men glorying in you, nobility

of blood--a meager thing!--I should not wonder,
for even where desire is not awry,
I mean in Heaven, I too felt such pride.

You are indeed a cloak that soon wears out,
so that if, day by day, we add no patch,
then circling time will trim you with its shears.

My speech began again with you, the word
that Rome was the first city to allow,
although her people seldom speak it now;

at this word, Beatrice, somewhat apart,
smiling, seemed like the woman who had coughed--
so goes the tale--at Guinevere's first fault.

So did my speech begin: "You are my father;
you hearten me to speak with confidence;
you raise me so that I am more than I.

So many streams have filled my mind with gladness--
so many, and such gladness, that mind must
rejoice that it can bear this and not burst.

Then tell me, founder of my family,
who were your ancestors and, in your boyhood,
what were the years the records registered;

and tell me of the sheepfold of St. John--
how numerous it was, who in that flock
were worthy of the highest offices."

As at the breathing of the winds, a coal
will quicken into flame, so I saw that
light glow at words that were affectionate;

and as, before my eyes, it grew more fair,
so, with a voice more gentle and more sweet--
not in our modern speech--it said to me:

"Down from that day when Ave was pronounced,
until my mother (blessed now), by giving
birth, eased the burden borne in bearing me,

this fire of Mars had come five--hundred--fifty
and thirty more times to its Lion--there
to be rekindled underneath its paw.

My ancestors and I were born just where
the runner in your yearly games first comes
upon the boundary of the final ward.

That is enough concerning my forebears:
what were their names, from where they came--of that,
silence, not speech, is more appropriate.

All those who, at that time, between the Baptist
and Mars, were capable of bearing arms,
numbered one fifth of those who live there now.

But then the citizens, now mixed with Campi,
with the Certaldo, and with the Figline,
were pure down to the humblest artisan.

Oh, it would be far better if you had
those whom I mention as your neighbors (and
your boundaries at Galuzzo and Trespiano),

than to have them within, to bear the stench
of Aguglione's wretch and Signa's wretch,
whose sharp eyes now on barratry are set.

If those who, in the world, go most astray
had not seen Caesar with stepmothers' eyes,
but, like a mother to her son, been kind,

then one who has become a Florentine
trader and money changer would have stayed
in Semifonte, where his fathers peddled,

the Counts would still be lords of Montemurlo,
the Cerchi would be in Acone's parish,
perhaps the Buondelmonti in Valdigreve.

The mingling of the populations led
to evil in the city, even as
food piled on food destroys the body's health;

the blind bull falls more quickly, more headlong,
than does the blind lamb; and the one blade can
often cut more and better than five swords.

Consider Luni, Urbisaglia, how
they went to ruin (Sinigaglia follows,
and Chiusi, too, will soon have vanished); then,

if you should hear of families undone,
you will find nothing strange or difficult
in that--since even cities meet their end.

All things that you possess, possess their death,
just as you do; but in some things that last
long, death can hide from you whose lives are short.

And even as the heaven of the moon,
revolving, respiteless, conceals and then
reveals the shores, so Fortune does with Florence;

therefore, there is no cause for wonder in
what I shall tell of noble Florentines,
of those whose reputations time has hidden.

I saw the Ughi, saw the Catellini,
Filippi, Greci, Ormanni, Alberichi,
famed citizens already in decline,

and saw, as great as they were venerable,
dell'Arca with della Sannella, and
Ardinghi, Soldanieri, and Bostichi.

Nearby the gate that now is burdened with
new treachery that weighs so heavily
that it will bring the vessel to shipwreck,

there were the Ravignani, from whose line
Count Guido comes and all who--since--derive
their name from the illustrious Bellincione.

And della Pressa knew already how
to rule; and Galigaio, in his house,
already had the gilded hilt and pommel.

The stripe of Vair had mightiness already,
as did the Giuochi, Galli, and Barucci,
Fifanti, and Sacchetti, and those who

blush for the bushel; and the stock from which
spring the Calfucci was already mighty,
and Sizzi and Arrigucci were already

raised to high office. Oh, how great were those
I saw--whom pride laid low! And the gold balls,
in all of her great actions, flowered Florence.

Such were the ancestors of those who now,
whenever bishops' sees are vacant, grow
fat as they sit in church consistories.

The breed--so arrogant and dragonlike
in chasing him who flees, but lamblike, meek
to him who shows his teeth or else his purse--

was on the rise already, but of stock
so mean that Ubertin Donato, when
his father--in--law made him kin to them,

was scarcely pleased. Already Caponsacco
had come from Fiesole down to the market;
already citizens of note were Giuda

and Infangato. I shall tell a thing
incredible and true: the gateway through
the inner walls was named for the della Pera.

All those whose arms bear part of the fair ensign
of the great baron--he whose memory
and worth are honored on the feast of Thomas--

received knighthood and privilege from him,
though he whose coat of arms has fringed that ensign
has taken sides now with the populace.

The Gualterotti and the Importuni
were there already; were the Borgo spared
new neighbors, it would still be tranquil there.

The house of Amidei, with which your sorrows
began--by reason of its just resentment,
which ruined you and ended years of gladness--

was honored then, as were its close companions.
O Buondelmonte, through another's counsel,
you fled your wedding pledge, and brought such evil!

Many would now rejoice, who still lament,
if when you first approached the city, God
had given you unto the river Ema!

But Florence, in her final peace, was fated
to offer up--unto that mutilated
stone guardian upon her bridge--a victim.

These were the families, and others with them:
the Florence that I saw--in such repose
that there was nothing to have caused her sorrow.

These were the families: with them I saw
her people so acclaimed and just, that on
her staff the lily never was reversed,

nor was it made bloodred by factious hatred."


## 17

Like Phaethon (one who still makes fathers wary
of sons) when he had heard insinuations,
and he, to be assured, came to Clymene,

such was I and such was I seen to be
by Beatrice and by the holy lamp
that--earlier--had shifted place for me.

Therefore my lady said to me: "Display
the flame of your desire, that it may
be seen well--stamped with your internal seal,

not that we need to know what you'd reveal,
but that you learn the way that would disclose
your thirst, and you be quenched by what we pour."

"O my dear root, who, since you rise so high,
can see the Point in which all times are present--
for just as earthly minds are able to

see that two obtuse angles cannot be
contained in a triangle, you can see
contingent things before they come to be--

while I was in the company of Virgil,
both on the mountain that heals souls and when
descending to the dead world, what I heard

about my future life were grievous words--
although, against the blows of chance I feel
myself as firmly planted as a cube.

Thus my desire would be appeased if I
might know what fortune is approaching me:
the arrow one foresees arrives more gently."

So did I speak to the same living light
that spoke to me before; as Beatrice
had wished, what was my wish was now confessed.

Not with the maze of words that used to snare
the fools upon this earth before the Lamb
of God who takes away our sins was slain,

but with words plain and unambiguous,
that loving father, hidden, yet revealed
by his own smile, replied: "Contingency,

while not extending past the book in which
your world of matter has been writ, is yet
in the Eternal Vision all depicted

(but this does not imply necessity,
just as a ship that sails downstream is not
determined by the eye that watches it).

And from that Vision--just as from an organ
the ear receives a gentle harmony--
what time prepares for you appears to me.

Hippolytus was forced to leave his Athens
because of his stepmother, faithless, fierce;
and so must you depart from Florence: this

is willed already, sought for, soon to be
accomplished by the one who plans and plots
where--every day--Christ is both sold and bought.

The blame, as usual, will be cried out
against the injured party; but just vengeance
will serve as witness to the truth that wields it.

You shall leave everything you love most dearly:
this is the arrow that the bow of exile
shoots first. You are to know the bitter taste

of others' bread, how salt it is, and know
how hard a path it is for one who goes
descending and ascending others' stairs.

And what will be most hard for you to bear
will be the scheming, senseless company
that is to share your fall into this valley;

against you they will be insane, completely
ungrateful and profane; and yet, soon after,
not you but they will have their brows bloodred.

Of their insensate acts, the proof will be
in the effects; and thus, your honor will
be best kept if your party is your self.

Your first refuge and your first inn shall be
the courtesy of the great Lombard, he
who on the ladder bears the sacred bird;

and so benign will be his care for you
that, with you two, in giving and in asking,
that shall be first which is, with others, last.

You shall--beside him--see one who, at birth,
had so received the seal of this strong star
that what he does will be remarkable.

People have yet to notice him because
he is a boy--for nine years and no more
have these spheres wheeled around him--but before

the Gascon gulls the noble Henry, some
sparks will have marked the virtue of the Lombard:
hard labor and his disregard for silver.

His generosity is yet to be
so notable that even enemies
will never hope to treat it silently.

Put trust in him and in his benefits:
his gifts will bring much metamorphosis--
rich men and beggars will exchange their states.

What I tell you about him you will bear
inscribed within your mind--but hide it there";
and he told things beyond belief even

for those who will yet see them. Then he added:
"Son, these are glosses of what you had heard;
these are the snares that hide beneath brief years.

Yet I'd not have you envying your neighbors;
your life will long outlast the punishment
that is to fall upon their treacheries."

After that holy soul had, with his silence,
showed he was freed from putting in the woof
across the web whose warp I set for him,

I like a man who, doubting, craves for counsel
from one who sees and rightly wills and loves,
replied to him: "I clearly see, my father,

how time is hurrying toward me in order
to deal me such a blow as would be most
grievous for him who is not set for it;

thus, it is right to arm myself with foresight,
that if I lose the place most dear, I may
not lose the rest through what my poems say.

Down in the world of endless bitterness,
and on the mountain from whose lovely peak
I was drawn upward by my lady's eyes,

and afterward, from light to light in Heaven,
I learned that which, if I retell it, must
for many have a taste too sharp, too harsh;

yet if I am a timid friend of truth,
I fear that I may lose my life among
those who will call this present, ancient times."

The light in which there smiled the treasure I
had found within it, first began to dazzle,
as would a golden mirror in the sun,

then it replied: "A conscience that is dark--
either through its or through another's shame--
indeed will find that what you speak is harsh.

Nevertheless, all falsehood set aside,
let all that you have seen be manifest,
and let them scratch wherever it may itch.

For if, at the first taste, your words molest,
they will, when they have been digested, end
as living nourishment. As does the wind,

so shall your outcry do--the wind that sends
its roughest blows against the highest peaks;
that is no little cause for claiming honor.

Therefore, within these spheres, upon the mountain,
and in the dismal valley, you were shown
only those souls that unto fame are known--

because the mind of one who hears will not
put doubt to rest, put trust in you, if given
examples with their roots unknown and hidden,

or arguments too dim, too unapparent."

## 18

By now that blessed mirror was delighting
in its own inner words; I, tasting mine,
was tempering the bitter with the sweet.

But she, the lady leading me to God,
said: "Shift your thoughts: remember--I am close
to Him who lightens every unjust hurt."

Hearing the loving sound my solace spoke,
I turned. But here I have to leave untold
what love I saw within her holy eyes,

not just because I do not trust my speech,
but, too, because recall cannot retrieve
that much, unless Another is its guide.

This only--of that moment--can I tell:
that even as I gazed at her, my soul
was free from any other need as long

as the Eternal Loveliness that shone
on Beatrice directly, from her eyes,
contented me with the reflected light.

But, conquering my will with her smile's splendor,
she told me: "Turn to him and listen--for
not only in my eyes is Paradise."

As, here on earth, at times our sentiment,
if it be passionate enough to take
the soul entirely, shows in the face,

so, in the flaming of the holy fire
to which I turned, I saw that he desired
some further words with me. And he began:

"In this fifth resting place, upon the tree
that grows down from its crown and endlessly
bears fruit and never loses any leaves,

are blessed souls that, down below, before
they came to heaven, were so notable
that any poem would be enriched by them.

Therefore look at the cross, along its horns:
those whom I name will race as swiftly as,
within a cloud, its rapid lightnings flash."

Then, just as soon as Joshua was named,
I saw a splendor thrust along the cross,
nor did I note the name before the act.

And at the name of noble Maccabeus,
I saw another flame wheel round itself,
and gladness was the whip that spurred that top.

So, too, for Charlemagne and Roland--my
attentive eye held fast to that pair like
a falconer who tracks his falcon's flight.

The next to draw my eyes along that cross
were William and Renouard and, too, Duke Godfrey
and Robert Guiscard. Then, when he had left me

and mingled with the other lights, the soul
who had addressed me showed his artistry,
singing among the singers in that sphere.

I turned to my right side to see if I
might see if Beatrice had signified
by word or gesture what I was to do

and saw such purity within her eyes,
such joy, that her appearance now surpassed
its guise at other times, even the last.

And as, by feeling greater joyousness
in doing good, a man becomes aware
that day by day his virtue is advancing,

so I became aware that my revolving
with heaven had increased its arc--by seeing
that miracle becoming still more brilliant.

And like the rapid change that one can see
in a pale woman's face when it has freed
itself from bearing bashful modesty,

such change I, turning, saw: the red of Mars
was gone--and now the temperate sixth star's
white heaven welcomed me into itself.

I saw within that torch of Jupiter
the sparkling of the love that it contained
design before my eyes the signs we speak.

And just as birds that rise from riverbanks,
as if rejoicing after feeding there,
will form a round flock or another shape,

so, in their lights, the saintly beings sang
and, in their flight, the figures that they spelled
were now a D, now I, and now an L.

First, they moved to the rhythm of their song;
then, after they had finished forming one
letter, they halted for a while, in silence.

O godly Pegasea, you who give
to genius glory and long life, as it,
through you, gives these to kingdoms and to cities,

give me your light that I may emphasize
these signs as I inscribed them in my mind:
your power--may it appear in these brief lines!

Those blessed spirits took the shape of five
times seven vowels and consonants, and I
noted the parts as they were spelled for me.

DILIGITE IUSTITIAM were the verb
and noun that first appeared in that depiction;
QUI IUDICATIS TERRAM followed after.

Then, having formed the M of the fifth word,
those spirits kept their order; Jupiter's
silver, at that point, seemed embossed with gold.

And I saw other lights descending on
the apex of the M and, settling, singing--
I think--the Good that draws them to Itself.

Then, as innumerable sparks rise up
when one strikes burning logs (and in those sparks
fools have a way of reading auguries),

from that M seemed to surge more than a thousand
lights; and they climbed, some high, some low, just as
the Sun that kindles them assigned positions.

With each light settled quietly in place,
I saw that the array of fire had shaped
the image of an eagle's head and neck.

He who paints there has no one as His guide:
He guides Himself; in Him we recognize
the shaping force that flows from nest to nest.

The other lights, who were, it seemed, content
at first to form a lily on the M,
moving a little, formed the eagle's frame.

O gentle star, what--and how many--gems
made plain to me that justice here on earth
depends upon the heaven you engem!

Therefore I pray the Mind in which begin
your motion and your force, to watch that place
which has produced the smoke that dims your rays,

that once again His anger fall upon
those who would buy and sell within that temple
whose walls were built by miracles and martyrs.

O hosts of Heaven whom I contemplate,
for all who, led by bad example, stray
within the life they live on earth, do pray!

Men once were used to waging war with swords;
now war means seizing here and there the bread
the tender Father would deny to none.

But you who only write to then erase,
remember this: Peter and Paul, who died
to save the vines you spoil, are still alive.

Well may you say:"My longing is so bent
on him who chose the solitary life
and for a dance was dragged to martyrdom--

I do not know the Fisherman or Paul."

## 19

The handsome image those united souls,
happy within their blessedness, were shaping,
appeared before me now with open wings.

Each soul seemed like a ruby--one in which
a ray of sun burned so, that in my eyes,
it was the total sun that seemed reflected.

And what I now must tell has never been
reported by a voice, inscribed by ink,
never conceived by the imagination;

for I did see the beak, did hear it speak
and utter with its voice both I and mine
when we and ours were what, in thought, was meant.

And it began: "Because I was both just
and merciful, I am exalted here
to glory no desire can surpass;

the memory I left on earth is such
that even the malicious praise it there,
although they do not follow its example."

Thus one sole warmth is felt from many embers,
even as from a multitude of loves
one voice alone rose from the Eagle's image.

To which I said: "O everlasting flowers
of the eternal gladness, who make all
your fragrances appear to me as one,

do let your breath deliver me from that
great fast which kept me hungering so long,
not finding any food for it on earth.

I know indeed that, though God's Justice has
another realm in Heaven as Its mirror,
you here do not perceive it through a veil.

You know how keenly I prepare myself
to listen, and you know what is that doubt
which caused so old a hungering in me."

Just like a falcon set free from its hood,
which moves its head and flaps its wings, displaying
its eagerness and proud appearance, so

I saw that ensign do, that Eagle woven
of praises of God's grace, accompanied
by songs whose sense those up above enjoy.

Then it began: "The One who turned His compass
to mark the world's confines, and in them set
so many things concealed and things revealed,

could not imprint His Power into all
the universe without His Word remaining
in infinite excess of such a vessel.

In proof of this, the first proud being, he
who was the highest of all creatures, fell--
unripe because he did not wait for light.

Thus it is clear that every lesser nature
is--all the more--too meager a container
for endless Good, which is Its own sole measure.

In consequence of this, your vision--which
must be a ray of that Intelligence
with which all beings are infused--cannot

of its own nature find sufficient force
to see into its origin beyond
what God himself makes manifest to man;

therefore, the vision that your world receives
can penetrate into Eternal Justice
no more than eye can penetrate the sea;

for though, near shore, sight reaches the sea floor,
you cannot reach it in the open sea;
yet it is there, but hidden by the deep.

Only the light that shines from the clear heaven
can never be obscured--all else is darkness
or shadow of the flesh or fleshly poison.

Now is the hiding place of living Justice
laid open to you--where it had been hidden
while you addressed it with insistent questions.

For you would say: ‘A man is born along
the shoreline of the Indus River; none
is there to speak or teach or write of Christ.

And he, as far as human reason sees,
in all he seeks and all he does is good:
there is no sin within his life or speech.

And that man dies unbaptized, without faith.
Where is this justice then that would condemn him?
Where is his sin if he does not believe?'

Now who are you to sit upon the bench,
to judge events a thousand miles away,
when your own vision spans so brief a space?

Of course, for him who would be subtle with me,
were there no Scriptures to instruct you, then
there would be place for an array of questions.

O earthly animals, o minds obtuse!
The Primal Will, which of Itself is good,
from the Supreme Good--Its Self--never moved.

So much is just as does accord with It;
and so, created good can draw It to
itself--but It, rayed forth, causes such goods."

Just as, above the nest, the stork will circle
when she has fed her fledglings, and as he
whom she has fed looks up at her, so did

the blessed image do, and so did I,
the fledgling, while the Eagle moved its wings,
spurred on by many wills in unison.

Wheeling, the Eagle sang, then said: "Even
as are my songs to you--past understanding--
such is Eternal Judgment to you mortals."

After the Holy Ghost's bright flames fell silent
while still within the sign that made the Romans
revered throughout the world, again the Eagle

began: "No one without belief in Christ
has ever risen to this kingdom--either
before or after He was crucified.

But there are many who now cry ‘Christ! Christ!'
who at the Final Judgment shall be far
less close to Him than one who knows not Christ;

the Ethiopian will shame such Christians
when the two companies are separated,
the one forever rich, the other poor.

What shall the Persians, when they come to see
that open volume in which they shall read
the misdeeds of your rulers, say to them?

There one shall see, among the deeds of Albert,
that which is soon to set the pen in motion,
his making of a desert of Prague's kingdom.

There one shall see the grief inflicted on
the Seine by him who falsifies his coins,
one who shall die beneath a wild boar's blow.

There one shall see the thirst of arrogance
that drives the Scot and Englishman insane--
unable to remain within their borders.

That book will show the life of Lechery
and ease the Spaniard led--and the Bohemian,
who never knew and never wished for valor.

That book will show the Cripple of Jerusalem--
his good deeds labeled with an I alone,
whereas his evils will be under M.

That book will show the greed and cowardice
of him who oversees the Isle of Fire,
on which Anchises ended his long life;

and to make plain his paltriness, the letters
that register his deeds will be contracted,
to note much pettiness in little space.

And all shall see the filthiness of both
his uncle and his brother, who dishonored
a family so famous--and two crowns.

And he of Portugal and he of Norway
shall be known in that book, and he of Rascia,
who saw--unluckily--the coin of Venice.

O happy Hungary, if she would let
herself be wronged no more! Happy Navarre,
if mountains that surround her served as armor!

And if Navarre needs token of her future,
now Nicosia and Famagosta offer--
as men must see--lament and anger over

their own beast, with his place beside the others."

## 20

When he who graces all the world with light
has sunk so far below our hemisphere
that on all sides the day is spent, the sky,

which had been lit before by him alone,
immediately shows itself again
with many lights reflecting one same source,

and I remembered this celestial course
when, in the blessed beak, the emblem of
the world and of its guardians fell silent;

for then all of those living lights grew more
resplendent, but the songs that they began
were labile--they escape my memory.

O gentle love that wears a smile as mantle,
how ardent was your image in those torches
filled only with the breath of holy thoughts!

After the precious, gleaming jewels with which
the sixth of Heaven's heavens was engemmed
had ended their angelic song in silence,

I seemed to hear the murmur of a torrent
that, limpid, falls from rock to rock, whose flow
shows the abundance of its mountain source.

Even as sound takes shape at the lute's neck,
and even as the wind that penetrates
the blow--hole of the bagpipe, so--with no

delay--that murmur of the Eagle rose
straight up, directly through its neck as if
its neck were hollow; and that murmuring

became a voice that issued from its beak,
taking the shape of words desired by
my heart--and that is where they were transcribed.

"Now you must watch--and steadily--that part
of me that can, in mortal eagles, see
and suffer the sun's force," it then began

to say to me, "because, of all the flames
from which I shape my form, those six with which
the eye in my head glows hold highest rank.

He who gleams in the center, my eye's pupil--
he was the singer of the Holy Spirit,
who bore the ark from one town to another;

now he has learned the merit will can earn--
his song had not been spurred by grace alone,
but his own will, in part, had urged him on.

Of those five flames that, arching, form my brow,
he who is nearest to my beak is one
who comforted the widow for her son;

now he has learned the price one pays for not
following Christ, through his experience
of this sweet life and of its opposite.

And he whose place is next on the circumference
of which I speak, along the upward arc,
delayed his death through truthful penitence;

now he has learned that the eternal judgment
remains unchanged, though worthy prayer below
makes what falls due today take place tomorrow.

The next who follows--one whose good intention
bore evil fruit--to give place to the Shepherd,
with both the laws and me, made himself Greek;

now he has learned that, even though the world
be ruined by the evil that derives
from his good act, that evil does not harm him.

He whom you see--along the downward arc--
was William, and the land that mourns his death,
for living Charles and Frederick, now laments;

now he has learned how Heaven loves the just
ruler, and he would show this outwardly
as well, so radiantly visible.

Who in the erring world below would hold
that he who was the fifth among the lights
that formed this circle was the Trojan Ripheus?

Now he has learned much that the world cannot
discern of God's own grace, although his sight
cannot divine, not reach its deepest site."

As if it were a lark at large in air,
a lark that sings at first and then falls still,
content with final sweetness that fulfills,

such seemed to me the image of the seal
of that Eternal Pleasure through whose will
each thing becomes the being that it is.

And though the doubt I felt there was as plain
as any colored surface cloaked by glass,
it could not wait to voice itself, but with

the thrust and weight of urgency it forced
"Can such things be?" out from my lips, at which
I saw lights flash--a vast festivity.

And then the blessed sign--its eye grown still
more bright--replied, that I might not be kept
suspended in amazement: "I can see

that, since you speak of them, you do believe
these things but cannot see how they may be;
and thus, though you believe them, they are hidden.

You act as one who apprehends a thing
by name but cannot see its quiddity
unless another set it forth to him.

Regnum celorum suffers violence
from ardent love and living hope, for these
can be the conquerors of Heaven's Will;

yet not as man defeats another man:
the Will of God is won because It would
be won and, won, wins through benevolence.

You were amazed to see the angels' realm
adorned with those who were the first and fifth
among the living souls that form my eyebrow.

When these souls left their bodies, they were not
Gentiles--as you believe--but Christians, one
with firm faith in the Feet that suffered, one

in Feet that were to suffer. One, from Hell,
where there is no returning to right will,
returned to his own bones, as the reward

bestowed upon a living hope, the hope
that gave force to the prayers offered God
to resurrect him and convert his will.

Returning briefly to the flesh, that soul
in glory--he of whom I speak--believed
in Him whose power could help him and, believing,

was kindled to such fire of true love
that, when he died a second death, he was
worthy to join in this festivity.

The other, through the grace that surges from
a well so deep that no created one
has ever thrust his eye to its first source,

below, set all his love on righteousness,
so that, through grace on grace, God granted him
the sight of our redemption in the future;

thus he, believing that, no longer suffered
the stench of paganism and rebuked
those who persisted in that perverse way.

More than a thousand years before baptizing,
to baptize him there were the same three women
you saw along the chariot's right--hand side.

How distant, o predestination, is
your root from those whose vision does not see
the Primal Cause in Its entirety!

And, mortals, do take care--judge prudently:
for we, though we see God, do not yet know
all those whom He has chosen; but within

the incompleteness of our knowledge is
a sweetness, for our good is then refined
in this good, since what God wills, we too will."

So, from the image God Himself had drawn,
what I received was gentle medicine;
and I saw my shortsightedness plainly.

And as a lutanist accompanies--
expert--with trembling strings, the expert singer,
by which the song acquires sweeter savor,

so, while the Eagle spoke--I can remember--
I saw the pair of blessed lights together,
like eyes that wink in concord, move their flames

in ways that were at one with what he said.

## 21
By now my eyes were set again upon my
lady's face, and with my eyes, my mind:
from every other thought, it was withdrawn.

She did not smile. Instead her speech to me
began: "Were I to smile, then you would be
like Semele when she was turned to ashes,

because, as you have seen, my loveliness--
which, even as we climb the steps of this
eternal palace, blazes with more brightness--

were it not tempered here, would be so brilliant
that, as it flashed, your mortal faculty
would seem a branch a lightning bolt has cracked.

We now are in the seventh splendor; this,
beneath the burning Lion's breast, transmits
to earth its rays, with which his force is mixed.

Let your mind follow where your eyes have led,
and let your eyes be mirrors for the figure
that will appear to you within this mirror."

That man who knows just how my vision pastured
upon her blessed face, might recognize
the joy I found when my celestial guide

had asked of me to turn my mind aside,
were he to weigh my joy when I obeyed
against my joy in contemplating her.

Within the crystal that--as it revolves
around the earth--bears as its name the name
of that dear king whose rule undid all evil,

I saw a ladder rising up so high
that it could not be followed by my sight:
its color, gold when gold is struck by sunlight.

I also saw so many flames descend
those steps that I thought every light displayed
in heaven had been poured out from that place.

And just as jackdaws, at the break of day,
together rise--such is their nature's way--
to warm their feathers chilled by night; then some

fly off and never do return, and some
wheel back to that point where they started from,
while others, though they wheel, remain at home;

such were the ways I saw those splendors take
as soon as they had struck a certain step,
where they had thronged as one in radiance.

The flame that halted nearest us became
so bright that in my mind I said: "I see
you clearly signaling to me your love.

But she from whom I wait for word on how
and when to speak and to be silent, pauses;
thus, though I would, I do well not to ask."

And she who, seeing Him who sees all things,
had seen the reason for my silence, said
to me: "Do satisfy your burning longing."

And I began: "My merit does not make
me worthy of reply, but for the sake
of her who gives me leave to question you--

a blessed living soul--who hide within
your joy, do let me know the reason why
you drew so near to me. And tell me, too,

why the sweet symphony of Paradise
is silent in this heaven, while, below,
it sounds devoutly through the other spheres."

"Your hearing is as mortal as your sight;
thus, here there is no singing," he replied,
"and Beatrice, in like wise, did not smile.

When, down the sacred staircase, I descended,
I only came to welcome you with gladness--
with words and with the light that mantles me.

The love that prompted me is not supreme;
above, is love that equals or exceeds
my own, as spirit--flames will let you see.

But the deep charity, which makes us keen
to serve the Providence that rules the world,
allots our actions here, as you perceive."

"O holy lamp," I said, "I do indeed
see how, within this court, it is your free
love that fulfills eternal Providence;

but this seems difficult for me to grasp:
why you alone, of those who form these ranks,
were he who was predestined to this task."

And I had yet to reach the final word
when that light made a pivot of its midpoint
and spun around as would a swift millstone.

Then, from within its light, that love replied:
"Light from the Deity descends on me;
it penetrates the light that enwombs me;

its power, as it joins my power of sight,
lifts me so far beyond myself that I
see the High Source from which that light derives.

From this there comes the joy with which I am
aflame; I match the clearness of my light
with equal measure of my clear insight.

But even Heaven's most enlightened soul,
that Seraph with his eye most set on God,
could not provide the why, not satisfy

what you have asked; for deep in the abyss
of the Eternal Ordinance, it is
cut off from all created beings' vision.

And to the mortal world, when you return,
tell this, lest men continue to trespass
and set their steps toward such a reachless goal.

The mind, bright here, on earth is dulled and smoky.
Think: how, below, can mind see that which hides
even when mind is raised to Heaven's height?"

His words so curbed my query that I left
behind my questioning; and I drew back
and humbly asked that spirit who he was.

"Not far from your homeland, between two shores
of Italy, the stony ridges rise
so high that, far below them, thunder roars.

These ridges form a hump called Catria;
a consecrated hermitage beneath
that peak was once devoted just to worship."

So his third speech to me began; then he
continued: "There, within that monastery,
in serving God, I gained tenacity:

with food that only olive juice had seasoned,
I could sustain with ease both heat and frost,
content within my contemplative thoughts.

That cloister used to offer souls to Heaven,
a fertile harvest, but it now is barren--
as Heaven's punishment will soon make plain.

There I was known as Peter Damian
and, on the Adriatic shore, was Peter
the Sinner when I served Our Lady's House.

Not much of mortal life was left to me
when I was sought for, dragged to take that hat
which always passes down from bad to worse.

Once there were Cephas and the Holy Ghost's
great vessel: they were barefoot, they were lean,
they took their food at any inn they found.

But now the modern pastors are so plump
that they have need of one to prop them up
on this side, one on that, and one in front,

and one to hoist them saddleward. Their cloaks
cover their steeds, two beasts beneath one skin:
o patience, you who must endure so much!"

These words, I saw, had summoned many flames,
descending step by step; I saw them wheel
and, at each turn, become more beautiful.

They joined around him, and they stopped, and raised
a cry so deep that nothing here can be
its likeness; but the words they cried I could

not understand--their thunder overcame me.


## 22
Amazement overwhelming me, I--like
a child who always hurries back to find
that place he trusts the most--turned to my guide;

and like a mother quick to reassure
her pale and panting son with the same voice
that she has often used to comfort him,

she said: "Do you not know you are in Heaven,
not know how holy all of Heaven is,
how righteous zeal moves every action here?

Now, since this cry has agitated you
so much, you can conceive how--had you seen
me smile and heard song here--you would have been

confounded; and if you had understood
the prayer within that cry, by now you would
know the revenge you'll see before your death.

The sword that strikes from Heaven's height is neither
hasty nor slow, except as it appears
to him who waits for it--who longs or fears.

But turn now toward the other spirits here;
for if you set your sight as I suggest,
you will see many who are notable."

As pleased my guide, I turned my eyes and saw
a hundred little suns; as these together
cast light, each made the other lovelier.

I stood as one who curbs within himself
the goad of longing and, in fear of being
too forward, does not dare to ask a question.

At this, the largest and most radiant
among those pearls moved forward that he might
appease my need to hear who he might be.

Then, in that light, I heard: "Were you to see,
even as I do see, the charity
that burns in us, your thoughts would have been uttered.

But lest, by waiting, you be slow to reach
the high goal of your seeking, I shall answer
what you were thinking when you curbed your speech.

That mountain on whose flank Cassino lies
was once frequented on its summit by
those who were still deluded, still awry;

and I am he who was the first to carry
up to that peak the name of Him who brought
to earth the truth that lifts us to the heights.

And such abundant grace had brought me light
that, from corrupted worship that seduced
the world, I won away the nearby sites.

These other flames were all contemplatives,
men who were kindled by that heat which brings
to birth the blessed flowers and blessed fruits.

Here is Macarius, here is Romualdus,
here are my brothers, those who stayed their steps
in cloistered walls, who kept their hearts steadfast."

I answered: "The affection that you show
in speech to me, and kindness that I see
and note within the flaming of your lights,

have given me so much more confidence,
just like the sun that makes the rose expand
and reach the fullest flowering it can.

Therefore I pray you, father--and may you
assure me that I can receive such grace--
to let me see, unveiled, your human face."

And he: "Brother, your high desire will be
fulfilled within the final sphere, as all
the other souls' and my own longing will.

There, each desire is perfect, ripe, intact;
and only there, within that final sphere,
is every part where it has always been.

That sphere is not in space and has no poles;
our ladder reaches up to it, and that
is why it now is hidden from your sight.

Up to that sphere, Jacob the patriarch
could see that ladder's topmost portion reach,
when it appeared to him so thronged with angels.

But no one now would lift his feet from earth
to climb that ladder, and my Rule is left
to waste the paper it was written on.

What once were abbey walls are robbers' dens;
what once were cowls are sacks of rotten meal.
But even heavy usury does not

offend the will of God as grievously
as the appropriation of that fruit
which makes the hearts of monks go mad with greed;

for all within the keeping of the Church
belongs to those who ask it in God's name,
and not to relatives or concubines.

The flesh of mortals yields so easily--
on earth a good beginning does not run
from when the oak is born until the acorn.

Peter began with neither gold nor silver,
and I with prayer and fasting, and when Francis
began his fellowship, he did it humbly;

if you observe the starting point of each,
and look again to see where it has strayed,
then you will see how white has gone to gray.

And yet, the Jordan in retreat, the sea
in flight when God had willed it so, were sights
more wonderful than His help here will be."

So did he speak to me, and he drew back
to join his company, which closed, compact;
then, like a whirlwind, upward, all were swept.

The gentle lady--simply with a sign--
impelled me after them and up that ladder,
so did her power overcome my nature;

and never here below, where our ascent
and descent follow nature's law, was there
motion as swift as mine when I took wing.

So, reader, may I once again return
to those triumphant ranks--an end for which
I often beat my breast, weep for my sins--

more quickly than your finger can withdraw
from flame and be thrust into it, I saw,
and was within, the sign that follows Taurus.

O stars of glory, constellation steeped
in mighty force, all of my genius--
whatever be its worth--has you as source:

with you was born and under you was hidden
he who is father of all mortal lives,
when I first felt the air of Tuscany;

and then, when grace was granted me to enter
the high wheel that impels your revolutions,
your region was my fated point of entry.

To you my soul now sighs devotedly,
that it may gain the force for this attempt,
hard trial that now demands its every strength.

"You are so near the final blessedness,"
so Beatrice began, "that you have need
of vision clear and keen; and thus, before

you enter farther, do look downward, see
what I have set beneath your feet already:
much of the world is there. If you see that,

your heart may then present itself with all
the joy it can to the triumphant throng
that comes in gladness through this ether's rounds."

My eyes returned through all the seven spheres
and saw this globe in such a way that I
smiled at its scrawny image: I approve

that judgment as the best, which holds this earth
to be the least; and he whose thoughts are set
elsewhere, can truly be called virtuous.

I saw Latona's daughter radiant,
without the shadow that had made me once
believe that she contained both rare and dense.

And there, Hyperion, I could sustain
the vision of your son, and saw Dione
and Maia as they circled nearby him.

The temperate Jupiter appeared to me
between his father and his son; and I
saw clearly how they vary their positions.

And all the seven heavens showed to me
their magnitudes, their speeds, the distances
of each from each. The little threshing floor

that so incites our savagery was all--
from hills to river mouths--revealed to me
while I wheeled with eternal Gemini.

My eyes then turned again to the fair eyes.


## 23
As does the bird, among beloved branches,
when, through the night that hides things from us, she
has rested near the nest of her sweet fledglings

and, on an open branch, anticipates
the time when she can see their longed--for faces
and find the food with which to feed them--chore

that pleases her, however hard her labors--
as she awaits the sun with warm affection,
steadfastly watching for the dawn to break:

so did my lady stand, erect, intent,
turned toward that part of heaven under which
the sun is given to less haste; so that,

as I saw her in longing and suspense,
I grew to be as one who, while he wants
what is not his, is satisfied with hope.

But time between one and the other when
was brief--I mean the whens of waiting and
of seeing heaven grow more radiant.

And Beatrice said: "There you see the troops
of the triumphant Christ--and all the fruits
ingathered from the turning of these spheres!"

It seemed to me her face was all aflame,
and there was so much gladness in her eyes--
I am compelled to leave it undescribed.

Like Trivia--at the full moon in clear skies--
smiling among the everlasting nymphs who
decorate all reaches of the sky,

I saw a sun above a thousand lamps;
it kindled all of them as does our sun
kindle the sights above us here on earth;

and through its living light the glowing Substance
appeared to me with such intensity--
my vision lacked the power to sustain it.

O Beatrice, sweet guide and dear! She said
to me: "What overwhelms you is a Power
against which nothing can defend itself.

This is the Wisdom and the Potency
that opened roads between the earth and Heaven,
the paths for which desire had long since waited."

Even as lightning breaking from a cloud,
expanding so that it cannot be pent,
against its nature, down to earth, descends,

so did my mind, confronted by that feast,
expand; and it was carried past itself--
what it became, it cannot recollect.

"Open your eyes and see what I now am;
the things you witnessed will have made you strong
enough to bear the power of my smile."

I was as one who, waking from a dream
he has forgotten, tries in vain to bring
that vision back into his memory,

when I heard what she offered me, deserving
of so much gratitude that it can never
be canceled from the book that tells the past.

If all the tongues that Polyhymnia
together with her sisters made most rich
with sweetest milk, should come now to assist

my singing of the holy smile that lit
the holy face of Beatrice, the truth
would not be reached--not its one--thousandth part.

And thus, in representing Paradise,
the sacred poem has to leap across,
as does a man who finds his path cut off.

But he who thinks upon the weighty theme,
and on the mortal shoulder bearing it,
will lay no blame if, burdened so, I tremble:

this is no crossing for a little bark--
the sea that my audacious prow now cleaves--
nor for a helmsman who would spare himself.

"Why are you so enraptured by my face
as to deny your eyes the sight of that
fair garden blossoming beneath Christ's rays?

The Rose in which the Word of God became
flesh grows within that garden; there--the lilies
whose fragrance let men find the righteous way."

Thus Beatrice, and I--completely ready
to do what she might counsel--once again
took up the battle of my feeble brows.

Under a ray of sun that, limpid, streams
down from a broken cloud, my eyes have seen,
while shade was shielding them, a flowered meadow;

so I saw many troops of splendors here
lit from above by burning rays of light,
but where those rays began was not in sight.

O kindly Power that imprints them thus,
you rose on high to leave space for my eyes--
for where I was, they were too weak to see You!

The name of that fair flower which I always
invoke, at morning and at evening, drew
my mind completely to the greatest flame.

And when, on both my eye--lights, were depicted
the force and nature of the living star
that conquers heaven as it conquered earth,

descending through that sky there came a torch,
forming a ring that seemed as if a crown:
wheeling around her--a revolving garland.

Whatever melody most sweetly sounds
on earth, and to itself most draws the soul,
would seem a cloud that, torn by lightning, thunders,

if likened to the music of that lyre
which sounded from the crown of that fair sapphire,
the brightest light that has ensapphired heaven.

"I am angelic love who wheel around
that high gladness inspired by the womb
that was the dwelling place of our Desire;

so shall I circle, Lady of Heaven, until
you, following your Son, have made that sphere
supreme, still more divine by entering it."

So did the circulating melody,
sealing itself, conclude; and all the other
lights then resounded with the name of Mary.

The royal cloak of all the wheeling spheres
within the universe, the heaven most
intense, alive, most burning in the breath

of God and in His laws and ordinance,
was far above us at its inner shore,
so distant that it still lay out of sight

from that point where I was; and thus my eyes
possessed no power to follow that crowned flame,
which mounted upward, following her Son.

And like an infant who, when it has taken
its milk, extends its arms out to its mother,
its feeling kindling into outward flame,

each of those blessed splendors stretched its peak
upward, so that the deep affection each
possessed for Mary was made plain to me.

Then they remained within my sight, singing
"Regina coeli" with such tenderness
that my delight in that has never left me.

Oh, in those richest coffers, what abundance
is garnered up for those who, while below,
on earth, were faithful workers when they sowed!

Here do they live, delighting in the treasure
they earned with tears in Babylonian
exile, where they had no concern for gold.

Here, under the high Son of God and Mary,
together with the ancient and the new
councils, he triumphs in his victory--

he who is keeper of the keys of glory.

## 24
"O fellowship that has been chosen for
the Blessed Lamb's great supper, where He feeds
you so as always to fulfill your need,

since by the grace of God, this man receives
foretaste of something fallen from your table
before death has assigned his time its limit,

direct your mind to his immense desire,
quench him somewhat: you who forever drink
from that Source which his thought and longing seek."

So Beatrice; and these delighted souls
formed companies of spheres around fixed poles,
flaming as they revolved, as comets glow.

And just as, in a clock's machinery,
to one who watches them, the wheels turn so
that, while the first wheel seems to rest, the last

wheel flies; so did those circling dancers--as
they danced to different measures, swift and slow--
make me a judge of what their riches were.

From that sphere which I noted as most precious,
I saw a flame come forth with so much gladness
that none it left behind had greater brightness;

and that flame whirled three times round Beatrice
while singing so divine a song that my
imagination cannot shape it for me.

My pen leaps over it; I do not write:
our fantasy and, all the more so, speech
are far too gross for painting folds so deep.

"O you who pray to us with such devotion--
my holy sister--with your warm affection,
you have released me from that lovely sphere."

So, after he had stopped his motion, did
the blessed flame breathe forth unto my lady;
and what he said I have reported here.

She answered: "O eternal light of that
great man to whom our Lord bequeathed the keys
of this astonishing gladness--the keys

He bore to earth--do test this man concerning
the faith by which you walked upon the sea;
ask him points light and grave, just as you please.

That he loves well and hopes well and has faith
is not concealed from you: you see that Place
where everything that happens is displayed.

But since this realm has gained its citizens
through the true faith, it rightly falls to him
to speak of faith, that he may glorify it."

Just as the bachelor candidate must arm
himself and does not speak until the master
submits the question for discussion--not

for settlement--so while she spoke I armed
myself with all my arguments, preparing
for such a questioner and such professing.

On hearing that light breathe, "Good Christian, speak,
show yourself clearly: what is faith?" I raised
my brow, then turned to Beatrice, whose glance

immediately signaled me to let
the waters of my inner source pour forth.
Then I: "So may the Grace that grants to me

to make confession to the Chief Centurion
permit my thoughts to find their fit expression";
and followed, "Father, as the truthful pen

of your dear brother wrote--that brother who,
with you, set Rome upon the righteous road--
faith is the substance of the things we hope for

and is the evidence of things not seen;
and this I take to be its quiddity."
And then I heard: "You understand precisely,

if it is fully clear to you why he
has first placed faith among the substances
and then defines it as an evidence."

I next: "The deep things that on me bestow
their image here, are hid from sight below,
so that their being lies in faith alone,

and on that faith the highest hope is founded;
and thus it is that faith is called a substance.
And it is from this faith that we must reason,

deducing what we can from syllogisms,
without our being able to see more:
thus faith is also called an evidence."

And then I heard: "If all one learns below
as doctrine were so understood, there would
be no place for the sophist's cleverness."

This speech was breathed from that enkindled love.
He added: "Now this coin is well-examined,
and now we know its alloy and its weight.

But tell me: do you have it in your purse?"
And I: "Indeed I do--so bright and round
that nothing in its stamp leads me to doubt."

Next, from the deep light gleaming there, I heard:
"What is the origin of the dear gem
that comes to you, the gem on which all virtues

are founded?" I: "The Holy Ghost's abundant
rain poured upon the parchments old and new;
that is the syllogism that has proved

with such persuasiveness that faith has truth--
when set beside that argument, all other
demonstrations seem to me obtuse."

I heard: "The premises of old and new
impelling your conclusion--why do you
hold these to be the speech of God?" And I:

"The proof revealing truth to me relies
on acts that happened; for such miracles,
nature can heat no iron, beat no anvil."

"Say, who assures you that those works were real?"
came the reply. "The very thing that needs
proof--no thing else--attests these works to you."

I said: "If without miracles the world
was turned to Christianity, that is
so great a miracle that all the rest

are not its hundredth part: for you were poor
and hungry when you found the field and sowed
the good plant--once a vine and now a thorn."

This done, the high and holy court resounded
throughout its spheres with "Te Deum laudamus,"
sung with the melody they use on high.

Then he who had examined me, that baron
who led me on from branch to branch so that
we now were drawing close to the last leaves,

began again: "That Grace which--lovingly--
directs your mind, until this point has taught
you how to find the seemly words for thought,

so that I do approve what you brought forth;
but now you must declare what you believe
and what gave you the faith that you receive."

"O holy father, soul who now can see
what you believed with such intensity
that, to His tomb, you outran younger feet,"

I then began, "you would have me tell plainly
the form of my unhesitating faith,
and also ask me to declare its source.

I answer: I believe in one God--sole,
eternal--He who, motionless, moves all
the heavens with His love and love for Him;

for this belief I have not only proofs
both physical and metaphysical;
I also have the truth that here rains down

through Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms
and through the Gospels and through you who wrote
words given to you by the Holy Ghost.

And I believe in three Eternal Persons,
and these I do believe to be one essence,
so single and threefold as to allow

both is and are. Of this profound condition
of God that I have touched on, Gospel teaching
has often set the imprint on my mind.

This is the origin, this is the spark
that then extends into a vivid flame
and, like a star in heaven, glows in me."

Just as the lord who listens to his servant's
announcement, then, as soon as he is silent,
embraces him, both glad with the good news,

so did the apostolic light at whose
command I had replied, while blessing me
and singing, then encircle me three times:

the speech I spoke had brought him such delight.

## 25

If it should happen . . . If this sacred poem--
this work so shared by heaven and by earth
that it has made me lean through these long years--

can ever overcome the cruelty
that bars me from the fair fold where I slept,
a lamb opposed to wolves that war on it,

by then with other voice, with other fleece,
I shall return as poet and put on,
at my baptismal font, the laurel crown;

for there I first found entry to that faith
which makes souls welcome unto God, and then,
for that faith, Peter garlanded my brow.

Then did a light move toward us from that sphere
from which emerged the first--the dear, the rare--
of those whom Christ had left to be His vicars;

and full of happiness, my lady said
to me: "Look, look--and see the baron whom,
below on earth, they visit in Galicia."

As when a dove alights near its companion,
and each unto the other, murmuring
and circling, offers its affection, so

did I see both those great and glorious
princes give greeting to each other, praising
the banquet that is offered them on high.

But when their salutations were complete,
each stopped in silence coram me, and each
was so aflame, my vision felt defeat.

Then Beatrice said, smiling: "Famous life
by whom the generosity of our
basilica has been described, do let

matters of hope reecho at this height;
you can--for every time that Jesus favored
you three above the rest, you were the figure

of hope." "Lift up your head, and be assured:
whatever comes here from the mortal world
has to be ripened in our radiance."

The second fire offered me this comfort;
at which my eyes were lifted to the mountains
whose weight of light before had kept me bent.

"Because our Emperor, out of His grace,
has willed that you, before your death, may face
His nobles in the inmost of His halls,

so that, when you have seen this court in truth,
hope--which, below, spurs love of the true good--
in you and others may be comforted,

do tell what hope is, tell how it has blossomed
within your mind, and from what source it came
to you"--so did the second flame continue.

And she, compassionate, who was the guide
who led my feathered wings to such high flight,
did thus anticipate my own reply:

"There is no child of the Church Militant
who has more hope than he has, as is written
within the Sun whose rays reach all our ranks:

thus it is granted him to come from Egypt
into Jerusalem that he have vision
of it, before his term of warring ends.

The other two points of your question, which
were not asked so that you may know, but that
he may report how much you prize this virtue,

I leave to him; he will not find them hard
or cause for arrogance; as you have asked,
let him reply, and God's grace help his task."

As a disciple answering his master,
prepared and willing in what he knows well,
that his proficiency may be revealed,

I said: "Hope is the certain expectation
of future glory; it is the result
of God's grace and of merit we have earned.

This light has come to me from many stars;
but he who first instilled it in my heart
was the chief singer of the Sovereign Guide.

‘May those'--he says within his theody--
‘who know Your name, put hope in You'; and if
one has my faith, can he not know God's name?

And just as he instilled, you then instilled
with your Epistle, so that I am full
and rain again your rain on other souls."

While I was speaking, in the living heart
of that soul--flame there came a trembling flash,
sudden, repeated, just as lightning cracks.

Then it breathed forth: "The love with which I still
burn for the virtue that was mine until
the palm and my departure from the field,

would have me breathe again to you who take
such joy in hope; and I should welcome words
that tell what hope has promised unto you."

And I: "The new and ancient Scriptures set
the mark for souls whom God befriends; for me,
that mark means what is promised us by hope.

Isaiah says that all of the elect
shall wear a double garment in their land:
and their land is this sweet life of the blessed.

And where your brother treats of those white robes,
he has--with words direct and evident--
made clear to us Isaiah's revelation."

At first, as soon as I had finished speaking,
"Sperent in te" was heard above us, all
the circling garlands answering this call.

And then, among those souls, one light became
so bright that, if the Crab had one such crystal,
winter would have a month of one long day.

And as a happy maiden rises and
enters the dance to honor the new bride--
and not through vanity or other failing--

so did I see that splendor, brightening,
approach those two flames dancing in a ring
to music suited to their burning love.

And there it joined the singing and the circling,
on which my lady kept her eyes intent,
just like a bride, silent and motionless.

"This soul is he who lay upon the breast
of Christ our Pelican, and he was asked
from on the Cross to serve in the great task."

So spoke my lady; but her gaze was not
to be diverted from its steadfastness,
not after or before her words were said.

Even as he who squints and strains to see
the sun somewhat eclipsed and, as he tries
to see, becomes sightless, just so did I

in my attempt to watch the latest flame,
until these words were said: "Why do you daze
yourself to see what here can have no place?

On earth my body now is earth and shall
be there together with the rest until
our number equals the eternal purpose.

Only those two lights that ascended wear
their double garment in this blessed cloister.
And carry this report back to your world."

When he began to speak, the flaming circle
had stopped its dance; so, too, its song had ceased--
that gentle mingling of their threefold breath--

even as when, avoiding danger or
simply to rest, the oars that strike the water,
together halt when rowers hear a whistle.

Ah, how disturbed I was within my mind,
when I turned round to look at Beatrice,
on finding that I could not see, though I

was close to her, and in the world of gladness!

## 26
While I, with blinded eyes, was apprehensive,
from that bright flame which had consumed my vision,
there breathed a voice that centered my attention,

saying: "Until you have retrieved the power
of sight, which you consumed in me, it would
be best to compensate by colloquy.

Then do begin; declare the aim on which
your soul is set--and be assured of this:
your vision, though confounded, is not dead,

because the woman who conducts you through
this godly region has, within her gaze,
that force the hand of Ananias had."

I said: "As pleases her, may solace--sooner
or later--reach these eyes, her gates when she
brought me the fire with which I always burn.

The good with which this court is satisfied
is Alpha and Omega of all writings
that Love has--loud or low--read out to me."

It was the very voice that had dispelled
the fear I felt at sudden dazzlement,
that now, with further words, made me concerned

to speak again. He said: "You certainly
must sift with a still finer sieve, must tell
who led your bow to aim at such a target."

And I: "By philosophic arguments
and by authority whose source is here,
that love must be imprinted in me; for

the good, once it is understood as such,
enkindles love; and in accord with more
goodness comes greater love. And thus the mind

of anyone who can discern the truth
on which this proof is founded must be moved
to love, more than it loves all else, that Essence

which is preeminent (since any good
that lies outside of It is nothing but
a ray reflected from Its radiance).

My mind discerns this truth, made plain by him
who demonstrates to me that the first love
of the eternal beings is their Maker.

The voice of the true Author states this, too,
where He tells Moses, speaking of Himself:
‘I shall show you all goodness.' You reveal

this, too, when you begin your high Evangel,
which more than any other proclamation
cries out to earth the mystery of Heaven."

I heard: "Through human reasoning and through
authorities according with it, you
conclude: your highest love is bent on God.

But tell me, too, if you feel other cords
draw you toward Him, so that you voice aloud
all of the teeth by which this love grips you."

The holy intent of Christ's Eagle was
not hidden; I indeed was made aware
of what he would most have my words declare.

Thus I began again: "My charity
results from all those things whose bite can bring
the heart to turn to God; the world's existence

and mine, the death that He sustained that I
might live, and that which is the hope of all
believers, as it is my hope, together

with living knowledge I have spoken of--
these drew me from the sea of twisted love
and set me on the shore of the right love.

The leaves enleaving all the garden of
the Everlasting Gardener, I love
according to the good He gave to them."

As soon as I was still, a song most sweet
resounded through that heaven, and my lady
said with the others: "Holy, holy, holy!"

And just as a sharp light will startle us
from sleep because the spirit of eyesight
races to meet the brightness that proceeds

from layer to layer in the eye, and he
who wakens is confused by what he sees,
awaking suddenly, and knows no thing

until his judgment helps him; even so
did Beatrice dispel, with her eyes' rays,
which shone more than a thousand miles, the chaff

from my eyes: I saw better than I had
before; and as if stupefied, I asked
about the fourth light that I saw among us.

My lady answered: "In those rays there gazes
with love for his Creator the first soul
ever created by the Primal Force."

As does a tree that bends its crown because
of winds that gust, and then springs up, raised by
its own sustaining power, so did I

while she was speaking. I, bewildered, then
restored to confidence by that desire
to speak with which I was inflamed, began:

"O fruit that was the only one to be
brought forth already ripe, o ancient father
to whom each bride is as a daughter and

daughter-in-law, devoutly as I can,
I do beseech you: speak with me. You see
my wish; to hear you sooner, I do not

declare it." And the primal soul--much as
an animal beneath a cover stirs,
so that its feelings are made evident

when what enfolds it follows all its movements--
showed me, through that which covered him, with what
rejoicing he was coming to delight me.

Then he breathed forth: "Though you do not declare
your wish, I can perceive it better than
you can perceive the things you hold most certain;

for I can see it in the Truthful Mirror
that perfectly reflects all else, while no
thing can reflect that Mirror perfectly.

You wish to hear how long it is since I
was placed by God in that high garden where
this lady readied you to climb a stair

so long, and just how long it pleased my eyes,
and the true cause of the great anger, and
what idiom I used and shaped. My son,

the cause of my long exile did not lie
within the act of tasting of the tree,
but solely in my trespass of the boundary.

During four thousand three hundred and two
re--turnings of the sun, while I was in
that place from which your Lady sent you Virgil,

I longed for this assembly. While on earth,
I saw the sun return to all the lights
along its way, nine hundred thirty times.

The tongue I spoke was all extinct before
the men of Nimrod set their minds upon
the unaccomplishable task; for never

has any thing produced by human reason
been everlasting--following the heavens,
men seek the new, they shift their predilections.

That man should speak at all is nature's act,
but how you speak--in this tongue or in that--
she leaves to you and to your preference.

Before I was sent down to Hell's torments,
on earth, the Highest Good--from which derives
the joy that now enfolds me--was called I;

and then He was called El. Such change must be:
the ways that mortals take are as the leaves
upon a branch--one comes, another goes.

On that peak rising highest from the sea,
my life--first pure, then tainted--lasted from
the first hour to the hour that follows on

the sixth, when the sun shifts to a new quadrant.

## 27
Unto the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
glory!"--all Paradise began, so that
the sweetness of the singing held me rapt.

What I saw seemed to me to be a smile
the universe had smiled; my rapture had
entered by way of hearing and of sight.

O joy! O gladness words can never speak!
O life perfected by both love and peace!
O richness so assured, that knows no longing!

Before my eyes, there stood, aflame, the four
torches, and that which had been first to come
began to glow with greater radiance,

and what its image then became was like
what Jupiter's would be if Mars and he
were birds and had exchanged their plumages.

After the Providence that there assigns
to every office its appointed time
had, to those holy choirs, on every side,

commanded silence, I then heard: "If I
change color, do not be amazed, for as
I speak, you will see change in all these flames.

He who on earth usurps my place, my place,
my place that in the sight of God's own Son
is vacant now, has made my burial ground

a sewer of blood, a sewer of stench, so that
the perverse one who fell from Heaven, here
above, can find contentment there below."

Then I saw all the heaven colored by
the hue that paints the clouds at morning and
at evening, with the sun confronting them.

And like a woman who, although secure
in her own honesty, will pale on even
hearing about another woman's failing,

just so did Beatrice change in appearance;
and I believe that such eclipse was in
the sky when He, the Highest Power, suffered.

Then his words followed with a voice so altered
from what it was before--even his likeness
did not display a greater change than that.

"The Bride of Christ was never nurtured by
my blood, and blood of Linus and of Cletus,
to be employed in gaining greater riches;

but to acquire this life of joyousness,
Sixtus and Pius, Urban and Calixtus,
after much lamentation, shed their blood.

We did not want one portion of Christ's people
to sit at the right side of our successors,
while, on the left, the other portion sat,

nor did we want the keys that were consigned
to me, to serve as an escutcheon on
a banner that waged war against the baptized;

nor did we want my form upon a seal
for trafficking in lying privileges--
for which I often blush and flash with anger.

From here on high one sees rapacious wolves
clothed in the cloaks of shepherds. You, the vengeance
of God, oh, why do you still lie concealed?

The Gascons and the Cahorsines--they both
prepare to drink our blood: o good beginning,
to what a miserable end you fall!

But that high Providence which once preserved,
with Scipio, the glory of the world
for Rome, will soon bring help, as I conceive;

and you, my son, who through your mortal weight
will yet return below, speak plainly there,
and do not hide that which I do not hide."

As, when the horn of heaven's Goat abuts
the sun, our sky flakes frozen vapors downward,
so did I see that ether there adorned;

for from that sphere, triumphant vapors now
were flaking up to the Empyrean--
returning after dwelling here with us.

My sight was following their semblances--
until the space between us grew so great
as to deny my eyes all farther reach.

At this, my lady, seeing me set free
from gazing upward, told me: "Let your eyes
look down and see how far you have revolved."

I saw that, from the time when I looked down
before, I had traversed all of the arc
of the first clime, from its midpoint to end,

so that, beyond Cadiz, I saw Ulysses'
mad course and, to the east, could almost see
that shoreline where Europa was sweet burden.

I should have seen more of this threshing floor
but for the motion of the sun beneath
my feet: it was a sign and more away.

My mind, enraptured, always longing for
my lady gallantly, was burning more
than ever for my eyes' return to her;

and if--by means of human,flesh or portraits--
nature or art has fashioned lures to draw
the eye so as to grip the mind, all these

would seem nothing if set beside the godly
beauty that shone upon me when I turned
to see the smiling face of Beatrice.

The powers that her gaze now granted me
drew me out of the lovely nest of Leda
and thrust me into heaven's swiftest sphere.

Its parts were all so equally alive
and excellent, that I cannot say which
place Beatrice selected for my entry.

But she, who saw what my desire was--
her smile had so much gladness that within
her face there seemed to be God's joy--began:

"The nature of the universe, which holds
the center still and moves all else around it,
begins here as if from its turning--post.

This heaven has no other where than this:
the mind of God, in which are kindled both
the love that turns it and the force it rains.

As in a circle, light and love enclose it,
as it surrounds the rest--and that enclosing,
only He who encloses understands.

No other heaven measures this sphere's motion,
but it serves as the measure for the rest,
even as half and fifth determine ten;

and now it can be evident to you
how time has roots within this vessel and,
within the other vessels, has its leaves.

O greediness, you who--within your depths--
cause mortals to sink so, that none is left
able to lift his eyes above your waves!

The will has a good blossoming in men;
but then the never--ending downpours turn
the sound plums into rotten, empty skins.

For innocence and trust are to be found
only in little children; then they flee
even before a full beard cloaks the cheeks.

One, for as long as he still lisps, will fast,
but when his tongue is free at last, he gorges,
devouring any food through any month;

and one, while he still lisps, will love and heed
his mother, but when he acquires speech
more fully, he will long to see her buried.

Just so, white skin turns black when it is struck
by direct light--the lovely daughter of
the one who brings us dawn and leaves us evening.

That you not be amazed at what I say,
consider this: on earth no king holds sway;
therefore, the family of humans strays.

But well before a thousand years have passed
(and January is unwintered by
day's hundredth part, which they neglect below),

this high sphere shall shine so, that Providence,
long waited for, will turn the sterns to where
the prows now are, so that the fleet runs straight;

and then fine fruit shall follow on the flower."
## 28
After the lady who imparadises
my mind disclosed the truth that is unlike
the present life of miserable mortals,

then, just as one who sees a mirrored flame--
its double candle stands behind his back--
even before he thought of it or gazed

directly at it, and he turns to gauge
if that glass tells the truth to him, and sees
that it accords, like voice and instrument,

so--does my memory recall--I did
after I looked into the lovely eyes
of which Love made the noose that holds me tight.

And when I turned and my own eyes were met
by what appears within that sphere whenever
one looks intently at its revolution,

I saw a point that sent forth so acute
a light, that anyone who faced the force
with which it blazed would have to shut his eyes,

and any star that, seen from earth, would seem
to be the smallest, set beside that point,
as star conjoined with star, would seem a moon.

Around that point a ring of fire wheeled,
a ring perhaps as far from that point as
a halo from the star that colors it

when mist that forms the halo is most thick.
It wheeled so quickly that it would outstrip
the motion that most swiftly girds the world.

That ring was circled by a second ring,
the second by a third, third by a fourth,
fourth by a fifth, and fifth ring by a sixth.

Beyond, the seventh ring, which followed, was
so wide that all of Juno's messenger
would be too narrow to contain that circle.

The eighth and ninth were wider still; and each,
even as greater distance lay between
it and the first ring, moved with lesser speed;

and, I believe, the ring with clearest flame
was that which lay least far from the pure spark
because it shares most deeply that point's truth.

My lady, who saw my perplexity--
I was in such suspense--said: "On that Point
depend the heavens and the whole of nature.

Look at the circle that is nearest It,
and know: its revolutions are so swift
because of burning love that urges it."

And I to her: "If earth and the nine spheres
were ordered like those rings, then I would be
content with what you have set out before me,

but in the world of sense, what one can see
are spheres becoming ever more divine
as they are set more distant from the center.

Thus, if my longing is to gain its end
in this amazing and angelic temple
that has, as boundaries, only love and light,

then I still have to hear just how the model
and copy do not share in one same plan--
for by myself I think on this in vain."

"You need not wonder if your fingers are
unable to undo that knot: no one
has tried, and so that knot is tightened, taut!"

my lady said, and then continued: "If
you would be satisfied, take what I tell you--
and let your mind be sharp as I explain.

The size of spheres of matter--large or small--
depends upon the power--more and less--
that spreads throughout their parts. More excellence

yields greater blessedness; more blessedness
must comprehend a greater body when
that body's parts are equally complete.

And thus this sphere, which sweeps along with it
the rest of all the universe, must match
the circle that loves most and knows the most,

so that, if you but draw your measure round
the power within--and not the semblance of--
the angels that appear to you as circles,

you will discern a wonderful accord
between each sphere and its Intelligence:
greater accords with more, smaller with less."

Just as the hemisphere of air remains
splendid, serene, when from his gentler cheek
Boreas blows and clears the scoriae,

dissolves the mist that had defaced the sky,
so that the heavens smile with loveliness
in all their regions; even so did I

become after my lady had supplied
her clear response to me, and--like a star
in heaven--truth was seen. And when her words

were done, even as incandescent iron
will shower sparks, so did those circles sparkle;
and each spark circled with its flaming ring--

sparks that were more in number than the sum
one reaches doubling in succession each
square of a chessboard, one to sixty--four.

I heard "Hosanna" sung, from choir to choir
to that fixed Point which holds and always shall
hold them to where they have forever been.

And she who saw my mind's perplexities
said: "The first circles have displayed to you
the Seraphim and Cherubim. They follow

the ties of love with such rapidity
because they are as like the Point as creatures
can be, a power dependent on their vision.

Those other loves that circle round them are
called Thrones of the divine aspect, because
they terminated the first group of three;

and know that all delight to the degree
to which their vision sees--more or less deeply--
that truth in which all intellects find rest.

From this you see that blessedness depends
upon the act of vision, not upon
the act of love--which is a consequence;

the measure of their vision lies in merit,
produced by grace and then by will to goodness:
and this is the progression, step by step.

The second triad--blossoming in this
eternal springtime that the nightly Ram
does not despoil--perpetually sings

‘Hosanna' with three melodies that sound
in the three ranks of bliss that form this triad;
within this hierarchy there are three

kinds of divinities: first, the Dominions,
and then the Virtues; and the final order
contains the Powers. The two penultimate

groups of rejoicing ones within the next
triad are wheeling Principalities
and the Archangels; last, the playful Angels.

These orders all direct--ecstatically--
their eyes on high; and downward, they exert
such force that all are drawn and draw to God.

And Dionysius, with much longing, set
himself to contemplate these orders: he
named and distinguished them just as I do.

Though, later, Gregory disputed him,
when Gregory came here--when he could see
with opened eyes--he smiled at his mistake.

You need not wonder if a mortal told
such secret truth on earth: it was disclosed
to him by one who saw it here above--

both that and other truths about these circles."

## 29
As long as both Latona's children take
(when, covered by the Ram and Scales, they make
their belt of the horizon at the same

moment) to pass from equilibrium--
the zenith held in balance--to that state
where, changing hemispheres, each leaves that belt,

so long did Beatrice, a smile upon
her face, keep silent, even as she gazed
intently at the Point that overwhelmed me.

Then she began: "I tell--not ask--what you
now want to hear, for I have seen it there
where, in one point, all whens and ubis end.

Not to acquire new goodness for Himself--
which cannot be--but that his splendor might,
as it shines back to Him, declare ‘Subsisto,'

in His eternity outside of time,
beyond all other borders, as pleased Him,
Eternal Love opened into new loves.

Nor did he lie, before this, as if languid;
there was no after, no before--they were
not there until God moved upon these waters.

Then form and matter, either separately
or in mixed state, emerged as flawless being,
as from a three--stringed bow, three arrows spring.

And as a ray shines into amber, crystal,
or glass, so that there is no interval
between its coming and its lighting all

so did the three--form, matter, and their union--
flash into being from the Lord with no
distinction in beginning: all at once.

Created with the substances were order
and pattern; at the summit of the world
were those in whom pure act had been produced;

and pure potentiality possessed
the lowest part; and in the middle, act
so joined potentiality that they

never disjoin. For you, Jerome has written
that the creation of the angels came
long centuries before all else was made;

but this, the truth I speak, is written by
scribes of the Holy Ghost--as you can find
if you look carefully--on many pages;

and reason, too, can see in part this truth,
for it would not admit that those who move
the heavens could, for so long, be without

their perfect task. Now you know where and when
and how these loving spirits were created:
with this, three flames of your desire are quenched.

Then, sooner than it takes to count to twenty,
a portion of the angels violently
disturbed the lowest of your elements.

The rest remained; and they, with such rejoicing,
began the office you can see, that they
never desert their circling contemplation.

The fall had its beginning in the cursed
pride of the one you saw, held in constraint
by all of the world's weights. Those whom you see

in Heaven here were modestly aware
that they were ready for intelligence
so vast, because of that Good which had made them:

through this, their vision was exalted with
illuminating grace and with their merit,
so that their will is constant and intact.

I would not have you doubt, but have you know
surely that there is merit in receiving
grace, measured by the longing to receive it.

By now, if you have taken in my words,
you need no other aid to contemplate
much in regard to this consistory.

But since on earth, throughout your schools, they teach
that it is in the nature of the angels
to understand, to recollect, to will,

I shall say more, so that you may see clearly
the truth that, there below, has been confused
by teaching that is so ambiguous.

These beings, since they first were gladdened by
the face of God, from which no thing is hidden,
have never turned their vision from that face,

so that their sight is never intercepted
by a new object, and they have no need
to recollect an interrupted concept.

So that, below, though not asleep, men dream,
speaking in good faith or in bad--the last,
however, merits greater blame and shame.

Below, you do not follow one sole path
as you philosophize--your love of show
and thought of it so carry you astray!

Yet even love of show is suffered here
with less disdain than the subordination
or the perversion of the Holy Scripture.

There, they devote no thought to how much blood
it costs to sow it in the world, to how
pleasing is he who--humbly--holds it fast.

Each one strives for display, elaborates
his own inventions; preachers speak at length
of these--meanwhile the Gospels do not speak.

One says that, to prevent the sun from reaching
below, the moon--when Christ was crucified--
moved back along the zodiac, so as

to interpose itself; who says so, lies--
for sunlight hid itself; not only Jews,
but Spaniards, Indians, too, saw that eclipse.

Such fables, shouted through the year from pulpits--
some here, some there--outnumber even all
the Lapos and the Bindos Florence has;

so that the wretched sheep, in ignorance,
return from pasture, having fed on wind--
but to be blind to harm does not excuse them.

Christ did not say to his first company:
‘Go, and preach idle stories to the world';
but he gave them the teaching that is truth,

and truth alone was sounded when they spoke;
and thus, to battle to enkindle faith,
the Gospels served them as both shield and lance.

But now men go to preach with jests and jeers,
and just as long as they can raise a laugh,
the cowl puffs up, and nothing more is asked.

But such a bird nests in that cowl, that if
the people saw it, they would recognize
as lies the pardons in which they confide--

pardons through which the world's credulity
increases so, that people throng to every
indulgence backed by no authority;

and this allows the Antonines to fatten
their pigs, and others, too, more piggish still,
who pay with counterfeit, illegal tender.

But since we have digressed enough, turn back
your eyes now to the way that is direct;
our time is short--so, too, must be our path.

The number of these angels is so great
that there has never been a mortal speech
or mortal thought that named a sum so steep;

and if you look at that which is revealed
by Daniel, you will see that, while he mentions
thousands, he gives no number with precision.

The First Light reaches them in ways as many
as are the angels to which It conjoins
Itself, as It illumines all of them;

and this is why (because affection follows
the act of knowledge) the intensity
of love's sweetness appears unequally.

By now you see the height, you see the breadth,
of the Eternal Goodness: It has made
so many mirrors, which divide Its light,

but, as before, Its own Self still is One."

## 30
Perhaps six thousand miles away from us,
the sixth hour burns, and now our world inclines
its shadow to an almost level bed,

so that the span of heaven high above
begins to alter so, that some stars are
no longer to be seen from our deep earth;

and as the brightest handmaid of the sun
advances, heaven shuts off, one by one,
its lights, until the loveliest is gone.

So did the triumph that forever plays
around the Point that overcame me (Point
that seems enclosed by that which It encloses)

fade gradually from my sight, so that
my seeing nothing else--and love--compelled
my eyes to turn again to Beatrice.

If that which has been said of her so far
were all contained within a single praise,
it would be much too scant to serve me now.

The loveliness I saw surpassed not only
our human measure--and I think that, surely,
only its Maker can enjoy it fully.

I yield: I am defeated at this passage
more than a comic or a tragic poet
has ever been by a barrier in his theme;

for like the sun that strikes the frailest eyes,
so does the memory of her sweet smile
deprive me of the use of my own mind.

From that first day when, in this life, I saw
her face, until I had this vision, no
thing ever cut the sequence of my song,

but now I must desist from this pursuit,
in verses, of her loveliness, just as
each artist who has reached his limit must.

So she, in beauty (as I leave her to
a herald that is greater than my trumpet,
which nears the end of its hard theme), with voice

and bearing of a guide whose work is done,
began again: "From matter's largest sphere,
we now have reached the heaven of pure light,

light of the intellect, light filled with love,
love of true good, love filled with happiness,
a happiness surpassing every sweetness.

Here you will see both ranks of Paradise
and see one of them wearing that same aspect
which you will see again at Judgment Day."

Like sudden lightning scattering the spirits
of sight so that the eye is then too weak
to act on other things it would perceive,

such was the living light encircling me,
leaving me so enveloped by its veil
of radiance that I could see no thing.

"The Love that calms this heaven always welcomes
into Itself with such a salutation,
to make the candle ready for its flame."

No sooner had these few words entered me
than I became aware that I was rising
beyond the power that was mine; and such

new vision kindled me again, that even
the purest light would not have been so bright
as to defeat my eyes, deny my sight;

and I saw light that took a river's form--
light flashing, reddish-gold, between two banks
painted with wonderful spring flowerings.

Out of that stream there issued living sparks,
which settled on the flowers on all sides,
like rubies set in gold; and then, as if

intoxicated with the odors, they
again plunged into the amazing flood:
as one spark sank, another spark emerged.

"The high desire that now inflames, incites,
you to grasp mentally the things you see,
pleases me more as it swells more; but first,

that you may satisfy your mighty thirst,
you must drink of these waters." So did she
who is the sun of my eyes speak to me.

She added this: "The river and the gems
of topaz entering and leaving, and
the grasses' laughter--these are shadowy

prefaces of their truth; not that these things
are lacking in themselves; the defect lies
in you, whose sight is not yet that sublime."

No infant who awakes long after his
usual hour would turn his face toward milk
as quickly as I hurried toward that stream;

to make still finer mirrors of my eyes,
I bent down toward the waters which flow there
that we, in them, may find our betterment.

But as my eyelids' eaves drank of that wave,
it seemed to me that it had changed its shape:
no longer straight, that flow now formed a round.

Then, just as maskers, when they set aside
the borrowed likenesses in which they hide,
seem to be other than they were before,

so were the flowers and the sparks transformed,
changing to such festivity before me
that I saw--clearly--both of Heaven's courts.

O radiance of God, through which I saw
the noble triumph of the true realm, give
to me the power to speak of what I saw!

Above, on high, there is a light that makes
apparent the Creator to the creature
whose only peace lies in his seeing Him.

The shape which that light takes as it expands
is circular, and its circumference
would be too great a girdle for the sun.

All that one sees of it derives from one
light--ray reflected from the summit of
the Primum Mobile, which from it draws

power and life. And as a hill is mirrored
in waters at its base, as if to see
itself--when rich with grass and flowers--graced,

so, in a thousand tiers that towered above
the light, encircling it, I saw, mirrored,
all of us who have won return above.

And if the lowest rank ingathers such
vast light, then what must be the measure of
this Rose where it has reached its highest leaves!

Within that breadth and height I did not find
my vision gone astray, for it took in
that joy in all its quality and kind.

There, near and far do not subtract or add;
for where God governs with no mediator,
no thing depends upon the laws of nature.

Into the yellow of the eternal Rose
that slopes and stretches and diffuses fragrance
of praise unto the Sun of endless spring,

now Beatrice drew me as one who, though
he would speak out, is silent. And she said:
"See how great is this council of white robes!

See how much space our city's circuit spans!
See how our seated ranks are now so full
that little room is left for any more!

And in that seat on which your eyes are fixed
because a crown already waits above it,
before you join this wedding feast, shall sit

the soul of noble Henry, he who is,
on earth, to be imperial; he shall
show Italy the righteous way--but when

she is unready. The blind greediness
bewitching you, has made you like the child
who dies of hunger and drives off his nurse.

And in the holy forum such shall be
the Prefect then, that either openly
or secretly he will not walk with Henry.

But God will not endure him long within
the holy ministry: he shall be cast
down there, where Simon Magus pays; he shall

force the Anagnine deeper in his hole."
## 31
So, in the shape of that white Rose, the holy
legion was shown to me--the host that Christ,
with His own blood, had taken as His bride.

The other host, which, flying, sees and sings
the glory of the One who draws its love,
and that goodness which granted it such glory,

just like a swarm of bees that, at one moment,
enters the flowers and, at another, turns
back to that labor which yields such sweet savor,

descended into that vast flower graced
with many petals, then again rose up
to the eternal dwelling of its love.

Their faces were all living flame; their wings
were gold; and for the rest, their white was so
intense, no snow can match the white they showed.

When they climbed down into that flowering Rose,
from rank to rank, they shared that peace and ardor
which they had gained, with wings that fanned their sides.

Nor did so vast a throng in flight, although
it interposed between the candid Rose
and light above, obstruct the sight or splendor,

because the light of God so penetrates
the universe according to the worth
of every part, that no thing can impede it.

This confident and joyous kingdom, thronged
with people of both new and ancient times,
turned all its sight and ardor to one mark.

O threefold Light that, in a single star
sparkling into their eyes, contents them so,
look down and see our tempest here below!

If the Barbarians, when they came from
a region that is covered every day
by Helice, who wheels with her loved son,

were, seeing Rome and her vast works, struck dumb
(when, of all mortal things, the Lateran
was the most eminent), then what amazement

must have filled me when I to the divine
came from the human, to eternity
from time, and to a people just and sane

from Florence came! And certainly, between
the wonder and the joy, it must have been
welcome to me to hear and speak nothing.

And as a pilgrim, in the temple he
had vowed to reach, renews himself--he looks
and hopes he can describe what it was like--

so did I journey through the living light,
guiding my eyes, from rank to rank, along
a path now up, now down, now circling round.

There I saw faces given up to love--
graced with Another's light and their own smile--
and movements graced with every dignity.

By now my gaze had taken in the whole
of Paradise--its form in general--
but without looking hard at any part;

and I, my will rekindled, turning toward
my lady, was prepared to ask about
those matters that inclined my mind to doubt.

Where I expected her, another answered:
I thought I should see Beatrice, and saw
an elder dressed like those who are in glory.

His gracious gladness filled his eyes, suffused
his cheeks; his manner had that kindliness
which suits a tender father. "Where is she?"

I asked him instantly. And he replied:
"That all your longings may be satisfied,
Beatrice urged me from my place. If you

look up and to the circle that is third
from that rank which is highest, you will see
her on the throne her merits have assigned her."

I, without answering, then looked on high
and saw that round her now a crown took shape
as she reflected the eternal rays.

No mortal eye, not even one that plunged
into deep seas, would be so distant from
that region where the highest thunder forms,

as--there--my sight was far from Beatrice;
but distance was no hindrance, for her semblance
reached me--undimmed by any thing between.

"O lady, you in whom my hope gains strength,
you who, for my salvation, have allowed
your footsteps to be left in Hell, in all

the things that I have seen, I recognize
the grace and benefit that I, depending
upon your power and goodness, have received.

You drew me out from slavery to freedom
by all those paths, by all those means that were
within your power. Do, in me, preserve

your generosity, so that my soul,
which you have healed, when it is set loose from
my body, be a soul that you will welcome."

So did I pray. And she, however far
away she seemed, smiled, and she looked at me.
Then she turned back to the eternal fountain.

And he, the holy elder, said: "That you
may consummate your journey perfectly--
for this, both prayer and holy love have sent me

to help you--let your sight fly round this garden;
by gazing so, your vision will be made
more ready to ascend through God's own ray.

The Queen of Heaven, for whom I am all
aflame with love, will grant us every grace:
I am her faithful Bernard." Just as one

who, from Croatia perhaps, has come
to visit our Veronica--one whose
old hunger is not sated, who, as long

as it is shown, repeats these words in thought:
"O my Lord Jesus Christ, true God, was then
Your image like the image I see now?"--

such was I as I watched the living love
of him who, in this world, in contemplation,
tasted that peace. And he said: "Son of grace,

you will not come to know this joyous state
if your eyes only look down at the base;
but look upon the circles, look at those

that sit in a position more remote,
until you see upon her seat the Queen
to whom this realm is subject and devoted."

I lifted up my eyes; and as, at morning,
the eastern side of the horizon shows
more splendor than the side where the sun sets,

so, as if climbing with my eyes from valley
to summit, I saw one part of the farthest
rank of the Rose more bright than all the rest.

And as, on earth, the point where we await
the shaft that Phaethon had misguided glows
brightest, while, to each side, the light shades off,

so did the peaceful oriflamme appear
brightest at its midpoint, so did its flame,
on each side, taper off at equal pace.

I saw, around that midpoint, festive angels--
more than a thousand--with their wings outspread;
each was distinct in splendor and in skill.

And there I saw a loveliness that when
it smiled at the angelic songs and games
made glad the eyes of all the other saints.

And even if my speech were rich as my
imagination is, I should not try
to tell the very least of her delights.

Bernard--when he had seen my eyes intent,
fixed on the object of his burning fervor--
turned his own eyes to her with such affection

that he made mine gaze still more ardently.
## 32
Though he had been absorbed in his delight,
that contemplator freely undertook
the task of teaching; and his holy words

began: "The wound that Mary closed and then
anointed was the wound that Eve--so lovely
at Mary's feet--had opened and had pierced.

Below her, in the seats of the third rank,
Rachel and Beatrice, as you see, sit.
Sarah, Rebecca, Judith, and the one

who was the great-grandmother of the singer
who, as he sorrowed for his sinfulness,
cried, ‘Miserere mei'--these you can see

from rank to rank as I, in moving through
the Rose, from petal unto petal, give
to each her name. And from the seventh rank,

just as they did within the ranks above,
the Hebrew women follow--ranging downward--
dividing all the tresses of the Rose.

They are the wall by which the sacred stairs
divide, depending on the view of Christ
with which their faith aligned. Upon one side,

there where the Rose is ripe, with all its petals,
are those whose faith was in the Christ to come;
and on the other side--that semicircle

whose space is broken up by vacant places--
sit those whose sight was set upon the Christ
who had already come. And just as on

this side, to serve as such a great partition,
there is the throne in glory of the Lady
of Heaven and the seats that range below it,

so, opposite, the seat of the great John--
who, always saintly, suffered both the desert
and martyrdom, and then two years of Hell--

serves to divide; below him sit, assigned
to this partition, Francis, Benedict,
and Augustine, and others, rank on rank,

down to this center of the Rose. Now see
how deep is God's foresight: both aspects of
the faith shall fill this garden equally.

And know that there, below the transverse row
that cuts across the two divisions, sit
souls who are there for merits not their own,

but--with certain conditions--others' merits;
for all of these are souls who left their bodies
before they had the power of true choice.

Indeed, you may perceive this by yourself--
their faces, childlike voices, are enough,
if you look well at them and hear them sing.

But now you doubt and, doubting, do not speak;
yet I shall loose that knot; I can release
you from the bonds of subtle reasoning.

Within the ample breadth of this domain,
no point can find its place by chance, just as
there is no place for sorrow, thirst, or hunger;

whatever you may see has been ordained
by everlasting law, so that the fit
of ring and finger here must be exact;

and thus these souls who have, precociously,
reached the true life do not, among themselves,
find places high or low without some cause.

The King through whom this kingdom finds content
in so much love and so much joyousness
that no desire would dare to ask for more,

creating every mind in His glad sight,
bestows His grace diversely, at His pleasure--
and here the fact alone must be enough.

And this is clearly and expressly noted
for you in Holy Scripture, in those twins
who, in their mother's womb, were moved to anger.

Thus, it is just for the celestial light
to grace their heads with a becoming crown,
according to the color of their hair.

Without, then, any merit in their works,
these infants are assigned to different ranks--
proclivity at birth, the only difference.

In early centuries, their parents' faith
alone, and their own innocence, sufficed
for the salvation of the children; when

those early times had reached completion, then
each male child had to find, through circumcision,
the power needed by his innocent

member; but then the age of grace arrived,
and without perfect baptism in Christ,
such innocence was kept below, in Limbo.

Look now upon the face that is most like
the face of Christ, for only through its brightness
can you prepare your vision to see Him."

I saw such joy rain down upon her, joy
carried by holy intellects created
to fly at such a height, that all which I

had seen before did not transfix me with
amazement so intense, nor show to me
a semblance that was so akin to God.

And the angelic love who had descended
earlier, now spread his wings before her,
singing "Ave Maria, gratia plena."

On every side, the blessed court replied,
singing responses to his godly song,
so that each spirit there grew more serene.

"O holy father--who, for me, endure
your being here below, leaving the sweet
place where eternal lot assigns your seat--

who is that angel who with such delight
looks into our Queen's eyes--he who is so
enraptured that he seems to be a flame?"

So, once again, I called upon the teaching
of him who drew from Mary beauty, as
the morning star draws beauty from the sun.

And he to me: "All of the gallantry
and confidence that there can be in angel
or blessed soul are found in him, and we

would have it so, for it was he who carried
the palm below to Mary, when God's Son
wanted to bear our flesh as His own burden.

But follow with your eyes even as I
proceed to speak, and note the great patricians
of this most just and merciful empire.

Those two who, there above, are seated, most
happy to be so near the Empress, may
be likened to the two roots of this Rose:

the one who, on her left, sits closest, is
the father whose presumptuous tasting
caused humankind to taste such bitterness;

and on the right, you see that ancient father
of Holy Church, into whose care the keys
of this fair flower were consigned by Christ.

And he who saw, before he died, all of
the troubled era of the lovely Bride--
whom lance and nails had won--sits at his side;

and at the side of Adam sits that guide
under whose rule the people, thankless, fickle,
and stubborn, lived on manna. Facing Peter,

Anna is seated, so content to see
her daughter that, as Anna sings hosannas,
she does not move her eyes. And opposite

the greatest father of a family,
Lucia sits, she who urged on your lady
when you bent your brows downward, to your ruin.

But time, which brings you sleep, takes flight, and now
we shall stop here--even as a good tailor
who cuts the garment as his cloth allows--

and turn our vision to the Primal Love,
that, gazing at Him, you may penetrate--
as far as that can be--His radiance.

But lest you now fall back when, even as
you move your wings, you think that you advance,
imploring grace, through prayer you must beseech

grace from that one who has the power to help you;
and do you follow me with your affection--
so may my words and your heart share one way."

And he began this holy supplication:
## 33
"Virgin mother, daughter of your Son,
more humble and sublime than any creature,
fixed goal decreed from all eternity,

you are the one who gave to human nature
so much nobility that its Creator
did not disdain His being made its creature.

That love whose warmth allowed this flower to bloom
within the everlasting peace--was love
rekindled in your womb; for us above,

you are the noonday torch of charity,
and there below, on earth, among the mortals,
you are a living spring of hope. Lady,

you are so high, you can so intercede,
that he who would have grace but does not seek
your aid, may long to fly but has no wings.

Your loving-kindness does not only answer
the one who asks, but it is often ready
to answer freely long before the asking.

In you compassion is, in you is pity,
in you is generosity, in you
is every goodness found in any creature.

This man--who from the deepest hollow in
the universe, up to this height, has seen
the lives of spirits, one by one--now pleads

with you, through grace, to grant him so much virtue
that he may lift his vision higher still--
may lift it toward the ultimate salvation.

And I, who never burned for my own vision
more than I burn for his, do offer you
all of my prayers--and pray that they may not

fall short--that, with your prayers, you may disperse
all of the clouds of his mortality
so that the Highest Joy be his to see.

This, too, o Queen, who can do what you would,
I ask of you: that after such a vision,
his sentiments preserve their perseverance.

May your protection curb his mortal passions.
See Beatrice--how many saints with her!
They join my prayers! They clasp their hands to you!"

The eyes that are revered and loved by God,
now fixed upon the supplicant, showed us
how welcome such devotions are to her;

then her eyes turned to the Eternal Light--
there, do not think that any creature's eye
can find its way as clearly as her sight.

And I, who now was nearing Him who is
the end of all desires, as I ought,
lifted my longing to its ardent limit.

Bernard was signaling--he smiled--to me
to turn my eyes on high; but I, already
was doing what he wanted me to do,

because my sight, becoming pure, was able
to penetrate the ray of Light more deeply--
that Light, sublime, which in Itself is true.

From that point on, what I could see was greater
than speech can show: at such a sight, it fails--
and memory fails when faced with such excess.

As one who sees within a dream, and, later,
the passion that had been imprinted stays,
but nothing of the rest returns to mind,

such am I, for my vision almost fades
completely, yet it still distills within
my heart the sweetness that was born of it.

So is the snow, beneath the sun, unsealed;
and so, on the light leaves, beneath the wind,
the oracles the Sibyl wrote were lost.

O Highest Light, You, raised so far above
the minds of mortals, to my memory
give back something of Your epiphany,

and make my tongue so powerful that I
may leave to people of the future one
gleam of the glory that is Yours, for by

returning somewhat to my memory
and echoing awhile within these lines,
Your victory will be more understood.

The living ray that I endured was so
acute that I believe I should have gone
astray had my eyes turned away from it.

I can recall that I, because of this,
was bolder in sustaining it until
my vision reached the Infinite Goodness.

O grace abounding, through which I presumed
to set my eyes on the Eternal Light
so long that I spent all my sight on it!

In its profundity I saw--ingathered
and bound by love into one single volume--
what, in the universe, seems separate, scattered:

substances, accidents, and dispositions
as if conjoined--in such a way that what
I tell is only rudimentary.

I think I saw the universal shape
which that knot takes; for, speaking this, I feel
a joy that is more ample. That one moment

brings more forgetfulness to me than twenty--
five centuries have brought to the endeavor
that startled Neptune with the Argo's shadow!

So was my mind--completely rapt, intent,
steadfast, and motionless--gazing; and it
grew ever more enkindled as it watched.

Whoever sees that Light is soon made such
that it would be impossible for him
to set that Light aside for other sight;

because the good, the object of the will,
is fully gathered in that Light; outside
that Light, what there is perfect is defective.

What little I recall is to be told,
from this point on, in words more weak than those
of one whose infant tongue still bathes at the breast.

And not because more than one simple semblance
was in the Living Light at which I gazed--
for It is always what It was before--

but through my sight, which as I gazed grew stronger,
that sole appearance, even as I altered,
seemed to be changing. In the deep and bright

essence of that exalted Light, three circles
appeared to me; they had three different colors,
but all of them were of the same dimension;

one circle seemed reflected by the second,
as rainbow is by rainbow, and the third
seemed fire breathed equally by those two circles.

How incomplete is speech, how weak, when set
against my thought! And this, to what I saw.
is such--to call it little is too much.

Eternal Light, You only dwell within
Yourself, and only You know You; Self-knowing,
Self-known, You love and smile upon Yourself!

That circle--which, begotten so, appeared
in You as light reflected--when my eyes
had watched it with attention for some time,

within itself and colored like itself,
to me seemed painted with our effigy,
so that my sight was set on it completely.

As the geometer intently seeks
to square the circle, but he cannot reach,
through thought on thought, the principle he needs,

so I searched that strange sight: I wished to see
the way in which our human effigy
suited the circle and found place in it--

and my own wings were far too weak for that.
But then my mind was struck by light that flashed
and, with this light, received what it had asked.

Here force failed my high fantasy; but my
desire and will were moved already--like
a wheel revolving uniformly--by

the Love that moves the sun and the other stars.
