## 1

To course across more kindly waters now
my talent's little vessel lifts her sails,
leaving behind herself a sea so cruel;

and what I sing will be that second kingdom,
in which the human soul is cleansed of sin,
becoming worthy of ascent to Heaven.

But here, since I am yours, o holy Muses,
may this poem rise again from Hell's dead realm;
and may Calliope rise somewhat here,

accompanying my singing with that music
whose power struck the poor Pierides
so forcefully that they despaired of pardon.

The gentle hue of oriental sapphire
in which the sky's serenity was steeped--
its aspect pure as far as the horizon--

brought back my joy in seeing just as soon
as I had left behind the air of death
that had afflicted both my sight and breast.

The lovely planet that is patroness
of love made all the eastern heavens glad,
veiling the Pisces in the train she led.

Then I turned to the right, setting my mind
upon the other pole, and saw four stars
not seen before except by the first people.

Heaven appeared to revel in their flames:
o northern hemisphere, because you were
denied that sight, you are a widower!

After my eyes took leave of those four stars,
turning a little toward the other pole,
from which the Wain had disappeared by now,

I saw a solitary patriarch
near me--his aspect worthy of such reverence
that even son to father owes no more.

His beard was long and mixed with white, as were
the hairs upon his head; and his hair spread
down to his chest in a divided tress.

The rays of the four holy stars so framed
his face with light that in my sight he seemed
like one who is confronted by the sun.

"Who are you--who, against the hidden river,
were able to escape the eternal prison?"
he said, moving those venerable plumes.

"Who was your guide? What served you both as lantern
when, from the deep night that will always keep
the hellish valley dark, you were set free?

The laws of the abyss--have they been broken?
Or has a new, a changed decree in Heaven
let you, though damned, approach my rocky slopes?"

My guide took hold of me decisively;
by way of words and hands and other signs,
he made my knees and brow show reverence.

Then he replied: "I do not come through my
own self. There was a lady sent from Heaven;
her pleas led me to help and guide this man.

But since your will would have a far more full
and accurate account of our condition,
my will cannot withhold what you request.

This man had yet to see his final evening;
but, through his folly, little time was left
before he did--he was so close to it.

As I have told you, I was sent to him
for his deliverance; the only road
I could have taken was the road I took.

I showed him all the people of perdition;
now I intend to show to him those spirits
who, in your care, are bent on expiation.

To tell you how I led him would take long;
it is a power descending from above
that helps me guide him here, to see and hear you.

Now may it please you to approve his coming;
he goes in search of liberty--so precious,
as he who gives his life for it must know.

You know it--who, in Utica, found death
for freedom was not bitter, when you left
the garb that will be bright on the great day.

Eternal edicts are not broken for us;
this man's alive, and I'm not bound by Minos;
but I am from the circle where the chaste

eyes of your Marcia are; and she still prays
to you, o holy breast, to keep her as
your own: for her love, then, incline to us.

Allow our journey through your seven realms.
I shall thank her for kindness you bestow--
if you would let your name be named below."

"While I was there, within the other world,
Marcia so pleased my eyes," he then replied,
"each kindness she required, I satisfied.

Now that she dwells beyond the evil river,
she has no power to move me any longer,
such was the law decreed when I was freed.

But if a lady come from Heaven speeds
and helps you, as you say, there is no need
of flattery; it is enough, indeed,

to ask me for her sake. Go then; but first
wind a smooth rush around his waist and bathe
his face, to wash away all of Hell's stains;

for it would not be seemly to approach
with eyes still dimmed by any mists, the first
custodian angel, one from Paradise.

This solitary island, all around
its very base, there where the breakers pound,
bears rushes on its soft and muddy ground.

There is no other plant that lives below:
no plant with leaves or plant that, as it grows,
hardens--and breaks beneath the waves' harsh blows.

That done, do not return by this same pass;
the sun, which rises now, will show you how
this hillside can be climbed more easily."

With that he vanished; and without a word,
I rose and drew in closer to my guide,
and it was on him that I set my eyes.

And he began: "Son, follow in my steps;
let us go back; this is the point at which
the plain slopes down to reach its lowest bounds."

Daybreak was vanquishing the dark's last hour,
which fled before it; in the distance, I
could recognize the trembling of the sea.

We made our way across the lonely plain,
like one returning to a lost pathway,
who, till he finds it, seems to move in vain.

When we had reached the point where dew contends
with sun and, under sea winds, in the shade,
wins out because it won't evaporate,

my master gently placed both of his hands--
outspread--upon the grass; therefore, aware
of what his gesture and intention were,

I reached and offered him my tear--stained cheeks;
and on my cheeks, he totally revealed
the color that Inferno had concealed.

Then we arrived at the deserted shore,
which never yet had seen its waters coursed
by any man who journeyed back again.

There, just as pleased another, he girt me.
O wonder! Where he plucked the humble plant
that he had chosen, there that plant sprang up

again, identical, immediately.

## 2

By now the sun was crossing the horizon
of the meridian whose highest point
covers Jerusalem; and from the Ganges,

night, circling opposite the sun, was moving
together with the Scales that, when the length
of dark defeats the day, desert night's hands;

so that, above the shore that I had reached,
the fair Aurora's white and scarlet cheeks
were, as Aurora aged, becoming orange.

We still were by the sea, like those who think
about the journey they will undertake,
who go in heart but in the body stay.

And just as Mars, when it is overcome
by the invading mists of dawn, glows red
above the waters' plain, low in the west,

so there appeared to me--and may I see it
again--a light that crossed the sea: so swift,
there is no flight of bird to equal it.

When, for a moment, I'd withdrawn my eyes
that I might ask a question of my guide,
I saw that light again, larger, more bright.

Then, to each side of it, I saw a whiteness,
though I did not know what that whiteness was;
below, another whiteness slowly showed.

My master did not say a word before
the whitenesses first seen appeared as wings;
but then, when he had recognized the helmsman,

he cried: "Bend, bend your knees: behold the angel
of God, and join your hands; from this point on,
this is the kind of minister you'll meet.

See how much scorn he has for human means;
he'd have no other sail than his own wings
and use no oar between such distant shores.

See how he holds his wings, pointing to Heaven,
piercing the air with his eternal pinions,
which do not change as mortal plumage does."

Then he--that bird divine--as he drew closer
and closer to us, seemed to gain in brightness,
so that my eyes could not endure his nearness,

and I was forced to lower them; and he
came on to shore with boat so light, so quick
that nowhere did the water swallow it.

The helmsman sent from Heaven, at the stern,
seemed to have blessedness inscribed upon him;
more than a hundred spirits sat within.

"In exitu Israel de Aegypto,"
with what is written after of that psalm,
all of those spirits sang as with one voice.

Then over them he made the holy cross
as sign; they flung themselves down on the shore,
and he moved off as he had come--swiftly.

The crowd that he had left along the beach
seemed not to know the place; they looked about
like those whose eyes try out things new to them.

Upon all sides the sun shot forth the day;
and from mid--heaven its incisive arrows
already had chased Capricorn away,

when those who'd just arrived lifted their heads
toward us and said: "Do show us, if you know,
the way by which we can ascend this slope."

And Virgil answered: "You may be convinced
that we are quite familiar with this shore;
but we are strangers here, just as you are;

we came but now, a little while before you,
though by another path, so difficult
and dense that this ascent seems sport to us."

The souls who, noticing my breathing, sensed
that I was still a living being, then,
out of astonishment, turned pale; and just

as people crowd around a messenger
who bears an olive branch, to hear his news,
and no one hesitates to join that crush,

so here those happy spirits--all of them--
stared hard at my face, just as if they had
forgotten to proceed to their perfection.

I saw one of those spirits moving forward
in order to embrace me--his affection
so great that I was moved to mime his welcome.

O shades--in all except appearance--empty!
Three times I clasped my hands behind him and
as often brought them back against my chest.

Dismay, I think, was painted on my face;
at this, that shadow smiled as he withdrew;
and I, still seeking him, again advanced.

Gently, he said that I could now stand back;
then I knew who he was, and I beseeched
him to remain awhile and talk with me.

He answered: "As I loved you when I was
within my mortal flesh, so, freed, I love you:
therefore I stay. But you, why do you journey?"

"My own Casella, to return again
to where I am, I journey thus; but why,"
I said, "were you deprived of so much time?"

And he: "No injury is done to me
if he who takes up whom--and when--he pleases
has kept me from this crossing many times,

for his own will derives from a just will.
And yet, for three months now, he has accepted,
most tranquilly, all those who would embark.

Therefore, I, who had turned then to the shore
at which the Tiber's waters mix with salt,
was gathered in by his benevolence.

Straight to that river mouth, he set his wings:
that always is the place of gathering
for those who do not sink to Acheron."

And I: "If there's no new law that denies
you memory or practice of the songs
of love that used to quiet all my longings,

then may it please you with those songs to solace
my soul somewhat; for--having journeyed here
together with my body--it is weary."

"Love that discourses to me in my mind"
he then began to sing--and sang so sweetly
that I still hear that sweetness sound in me.

My master, I, and all that company
around the singer seemed so satisfied,
as if no other thing might touch our minds.

We all were motionless and fixed upon
the notes, when all at once the grave old man
cried out: "What have we here, you laggard spirits?

What negligence, what lingering is this?
Quick, to the mountain to cast off the slough
that will not let you see God show Himself!"

Even as doves, assembled where they feed,
quietly gathering their grain or weeds,
forgetful of their customary strut,

will, if some thing appears that makes them fear,
immediately leave their food behind
because they are assailed by greater care;

so did I see that new--come company--
they left the song behind, turned toward the slope,
like those who go and yet do not know where.

And we were no less hasty in departure.


## 3

But while their sudden flight was scattering
those souls across the plain and toward the mountain
where we are racked by rightful punishments,

I drew in closer to my true companion.
For how could I have run ahead without him?
Who could have helped me as I climbed the mountain?

He seemed like one who's stung by self--reproof;
o pure and noble conscience, you in whom
each petty fault becomes a harsh rebuke!

And when his feet had left off hurrying--
for haste denies all acts their dignity--
my mind, which was--before--too focused, grew

more curious and widened its attention;
I set my vision toward the slope that rises
most steeply, up to heaven from the sea.

Behind my back the sun was flaming red;
but there, ahead of me, its light was shattered
because its rays were resting on my body.

And when I saw the ground was dark in front
of me and me alone, afraid that I
had been abandoned, I turned to my side;

and he, my only comfort, as he turned
around, began: "Why must you still mistrust?
Don't you believe that I am with--and guide--you?

The body from within which I cast shadows
is buried where it now is evening: taken
from Brindisi, it now belongs to Naples.

Thus, if no shadow falls in front of me,
do not be more amazed than when you see
the heavens not impede each other's rays.

The Power has disposed such bodiless
bodies to suffer torments, heat and cold;
how this is done, He would not have us know.

Foolish is he who hopes our intellect
can reach the end of that unending road
only one Substance in three Persons follows.

Confine yourselves, o humans, to the quia;
had you been able to see all, there would
have been no need for Mary to give birth.

You saw the fruitless longing of those men
who would--if reason could--have been content,
those whose desire eternally laments:

I speak of Aristotle and of Plato--
and many others." Here he bent his head
and said no more, remaining with his sorrow.

By this time we had reached the mountain's base,
discovering a wall of rock so sheer
that even agile legs are useless there.

The loneliest, most jagged promontory
that lies between Turbia and Lerici,
compared with it, provides stairs wide and easy.

"Now who knows where, along this mountainside,"
my master, halting, asked, "one finds a rise
where even he who has no wings can climb?"

While he, his eyes upon the ground, consulted
his mind, considering what road to take,
and I looked up around the wall of rock,

along the left a band of souls appeared
to me to be approaching us--but so
unhurriedly, their movements did not show.

"Lift up your eyes," I told my master; "here
are those who can advise us how to go,
if you can find no counsel in yourself."

At this, he looked at them and, less distressed,
replied: "Let us go there; their steps are slow;
and you, my gentle son, hold fast to hope."

The distance from that company to us--
I mean when we had gone a thousand paces--
was still as far as a fine hurler's toss,

when they all huddled toward the hard rock wall
and, once they'd crowded there, refused to budge,
even as men, when apprehensive, halt.

"O chosen souls, you who have ended well,"
Virgil began, "by virtue of that peace
which I believe awaits you all, please tell

us where the slope inclines and can be climbed;
for he who best discerns the worth of time
is most distressed whenever time is lost."

Even as sheep that move, first one, then two,
then three, out of the fold--the others also
stand, eyes and muzzles lowered, timidly;

and what the first sheep does, the others do,
and if it halts, they huddle close behind,
simple and quiet and not knowing why:

so, then, I saw those spirits in the front
of that flock favored by good fortune move--
their looks were modest; seemly, slow, their walk.

As soon as these souls saw, upon my right,
along the ground, a gap in the sun's light,
where shadow stretched from me to the rock wall,

they stopped and then drew back somewhat; and all
who came behind them--though they did not know
why those ahead had halted--also slowed.

"Without your asking, I shall tell you plainly
that you are looking at a human body;
that's why the sunlight on the ground is broken.

Don't be astonished; rest assured that he
would not attempt to cross this wall without
a force that Heaven sent him as support."

These were my master's words. That worthy band
replied: "Come back, and move in our direction,"
and gestured--with backhanded motions--right.

And one of them began: "Whoever you
may be, as you move forward, turn and see:
consider if--beyond--you've ever seen me."

I turned to look at him attentively:
he was fair--haired and handsome and his aspect
was noble--but one eyebrow had been cleft

by a swordstroke. When I had humbly noted
that I had never seen him, he said: "Look
now"--showing me a wound high on his chest.

Then, as he smiled, he told me: "I am Manfred,
the grandson of the Empress Constance; thus,
I pray that, when you reach the world again,

you may go to my lovely daughter, mother
of kings of Sicily and Aragon--
tell her the truth, lest she's heard something other.

After my body had been shattered by
two fatal blows, in tears, I then consigned
myself to Him who willingly forgives.

My sins were ghastly, but the Infinite
Goodness has arms so wide that It accepts
who ever would return, imploring It.

And if Cosenza's pastor, who was sent
to hunt me down--alive or dead--by Clement,
had understood this facet of God's mercy,

my body's bones would still be there--beneath
the custody of the great heap of stones--
near Benevento, at the bridgehead; now

rain bathes my bones, the wind has driven them
beyond the Kingdom, near the Verde's banks,
where he transported them with tapers spent.

Despite the Church's curse, there is no one
so lost that the eternal love cannot
return--as long as hope shows something green.

But it is true that anyone who dies
in contumacy of the Holy Church,
though he repented at the end, must wait

along this shore for thirty times the span
he spent in his presumptuousness, unless
that edict is abridged through fitting prayers.

Now see if you, by making known to my
kind Constance where you saw my soul and why
delay's decreed for me, can make me happy;

those here--through those beyond-- advance more quickly."

## 4

When any of our faculties retains
a strong impression of delight or pain,
the soul will wholly concentrate on that,

neglecting any other power it has
(and this refutes the error that maintains
that--one above the other--several souls

can flame in us); and thus, when something seen
or heard secures the soul in stringent grip,
time moves and yet we do not notice it.

The power that perceives the course of time
is not the power that captures all the mind;
the former has no force--the latter binds.

And I confirmed this by experience,
hearing that spirit in my wonderment;
for though the sun had fully climbed fifty

degrees, I had not noticed it, when we
came to the point at which in unison
those souls cried out to us: "Here's what you want."

The farmer, when the grape is darkening,
will often stuff a wider opening
with just a little forkful of his thorns,

than was the gap through which my guide and I,
who followed after, climbed, we two alone,
after that company of souls had gone.

San Leo can be climbed, one can descend
to Noli and ascend Cacume and
Bismantova with feet alone, but here

I had to fly: I mean with rapid wings
and pinions of immense desire, behind
the guide who gave me hope and was my light.

We made our upward way through rifted rock;
along each side the edges pressed on us;
the ground beneath required feet and hands.

When we had reached the upper rim of that
steep bank, emerging on the open slope,
I said: "My master, what way shall we take?"

And he to me: "Don't squander any steps;
keep climbing up the mountain after me
until we find some expert company."

The summit was so high, my sight fell short;
the slope was far more steep than the line drawn
from middle--quadrant to the center point.

I was exhausted when I made this plea:
"O gentle father, turn around and see--
I will be left alone unless you halt."

"My son," he said, "draw yourself up to there,"
while pointing to a somewhat higher terrace,
which circles all the slope along that side.

His words incited me; my body tried;
on hands and knees I scrambled after him
until the terrace lay beneath my feet.

There we sat down together, facing east,
in the direction from which we had come:
what joy--to look back at a path we've climbed!

My eyes were first set on the shores below,
and then I raised them toward the sun; I was
amazed to find it fall upon our left.

And when the poet saw that I was struck
with wonder as I watched the chariot
of light passing between the north and us,

he said to me: "Suppose Castor and Pollux
were in conjunction with that mirror there,
which takes the light and guides it north and south,

then you would see the reddish zodiac
still closer to the Bears as it revolves--
unless it has abandoned its old track.

If you would realize how that should be,
then concentrate, imagining this mountain
so placed upon this earth that both Mount Zion

and it, although in different hemispheres,
share one horizon; therefore, you can see,
putting your mind to it attentively,

how that same path which Phaethon drove so poorly
must pass this mountain on the north, whereas
it skirts Mount Zion on the southern side."

I said: "My master, surely I have never--
since my intelligence seemed lacking--seen
as clearly as I now can comprehend,

that the mid--circle of the heavens' motion
(one of the sciences calls it Equator),
which always lies between the sun and winter,

as you explained, lies as far north of here
as it lies southward of the site from which
the Hebrews, looking toward the tropics, saw it.

But if it please you, I should willingly
learn just how far it is we still must journey:
the slope climbs higher than my eyes can follow."

And he to me: "This mountain's of such sort
that climbing it is hardest at the start;
but as we rise, the slope grows less unkind.

Therefore, when this slope seems to you so gentle
that climbing farther up will be as restful
as traveling downstream by boat, you will

be where this pathway ends, and there you can
expect to put your weariness to rest.
I say no more, and this I know as truth."

And when his words were done, another voice
nearby was heard to say: "Perhaps you will
have need to sit before you reach that point!"

Hearing that voice, both of us turned around,
and to the left we saw a massive boulder,
which neither he nor I--before--had noticed.

We made our way toward it and toward the people
who lounged behind that boulder in the shade,
as men beset by listlessness will rest.

And one of them, who seemed to me exhausted,
was sitting with his arms around his knees;
between his knees, he kept his head bent down.

"O my sweet lord," I said, "look carefully
at one who shows himself more languid than
he would have been were laziness his sister!"

Then that shade turned toward us attentively,
lifting his eyes, but just above his thigh,
and said: "Climb, then, if you're so vigorous!"

Then I knew who he was, and the distress
that still was quickening my breath somewhat,
did not prevent my going to him; and

when I had reached him, scarcely lifting up
his head, he said: "And have you fathomed how
the sun can drive his chariot on your left?"

The slowness of his movements, his brief words
had stirred my lips a little toward a smile;
then I began: "From this time on, Belacqua,

I need not grieve for you; but tell me, why
do you sit here? Do you expect a guide?
Or have you fallen into your old ways?"

And he: "O brother, what's the use of climbing?
God's angel, he who guards the gate, would not
let me pass through to meet my punishment.

Outside that gate the skies must circle round
as many times as they did when I lived--
since I delayed good sighs until the end--

unless, before then, I am helped by prayer
that rises from a heart that lives in grace;
what use are other prayers--ignored by Heaven?"

And now the poet climbed ahead, before me,
and said: "It's time; see the meridian
touched by the sun; elsewhere, along the Ocean,

night now has set its foot upon Morocco."

## 5

I had already left those shades behind
and followed in the footsteps of my guide
when, there beneath me, pointing at me, one

shade shouted: "See the second climber climb:
the sun seems not to shine on his left side
and when he walks, he walks like one alive!"

When I had heard these words, I turned my eyes
and saw the shades astonished as they stared
at me--at me, and at the broken light.

"Why have you let your mind get so entwined,"
my master said, "that you have slowed your walk?
Why should you care about what's whispered here?

Come, follow me, and let these people talk:
stand like a sturdy tower that does not shake
its summit though the winds may blast; always

the man in whom thought thrusts ahead of thought
allows the goal he's set to move far off--
the force of one thought saps the other's force."

Could my reply be other than "I come"?
And--somewhat colored by the hue that makes
one sometimes merit grace--I spoke those words.

Meanwhile, along the slope, crossing our road
slightly ahead of us, people approached,
singing the Miserere verse by verse.

When they became aware that I allowed
no path for rays of light to cross my body,
they changed their song into a long, hoarse "Oh!"

And two of them, serving as messengers,
hurried to meet us, and those two inquired:
"Please tell us something more of what you are."

My master answered them: "You can return
and carry this report to those who sent you:
in truth, the body of this man is flesh.

If, as I think, they stopped to see his shadow,
that answer is sufficient: let them welcome
him graciously, and that may profit them."

Never did I see kindled vapors rend
clear skies at nightfall or the setting sun
cleave August clouds with a rapidity

that matched the time it took those two to speed
above; and, there arrived, they with the others
wheeled back, like ranks that run without a rein.

"These people pressing in on us are many;
they come beseeching you," the poet said;
"don't stop, but listen as you move ahead."

"O soul who make your way to gladness with
the limbs you had at birth, do stay your steps
awhile," they clamored as they came, "to see

if there is any of us whom you knew,
that you may carry word of him beyond.
Why do you hurry on? Why don't you stop?

We all were done to death by violence,
and we all sinned until our final hour;
then light from Heaven granted understanding,

so that, repenting and forgiving, we
came forth from life at peace with God, and He
instilled in us the longing to see Him."

And I: "Although I scrutinize your faces,
I recognize no one; but, spirits born
to goodness, if there's anything within

my power that might please you, then--by that
same peace which in the steps of such a guide
I seek from world to world--I shall perform it."

And one began: "We all have faith in your
good offices without your oath, as long
as lack of power does not curb your will.

Thus I, who speak alone--before the others--
beseech you, if you ever see the land
that lies between Romagna and the realm

of Charles, that you be courteous to me,
entreating those in Fano to bestow
fair prayers to purge me of my heavy sins.

My home was Fano; but the piercing wounds
from which there poured the blood where my life lived--
those I received among Antenor's sons,

there where I thought that I was most secure;
for he of Este, hating me far more
than justice warranted, had that deed done.

But had I fled instead toward Mira when
they overtook me at Oriaco, then
I should still be beyond, where men draw breath.

I hurried to the marsh. The mud, the reeds
entangled me; I fell. And there I saw
a pool, poured from my veins, form on the ground."

Another shade then said: "Ah, so may that
desire which draws you up the lofty mountain
be granted, with kind pity help my longing!

I was from Montefeltro, I'm Buonconte;
Giovanna and the rest--they all neglect me;
therefore, among these shades, I go in sadness."

And I to him: "What violence or chance
so dragged you from the field of Campaldino
that we know nothing of your burial place?"

"Oh," he replied, "across the Casentino
there runs a stream called Archiano--born
in the Apennines above the Hermitage.

There, at the place where that stream's name is lost,
I came--my throat was pierced--fleeing on foot
and bloodying the plain; and there it was

that I lost sight and speech; and there, as I
had finished uttering the name of Mary,
I fell; and there my flesh alone remained.

I'll speak the truth--do you, among the living,
retell it: I was taken by God's angel,
but he from Hell cried: ‘You from Heaven--why

do you deny me him? For just one tear
you carry off his deathless part; but I
shall treat his other part in other wise.'

You are aware how, in the air, moist vapor
will gather and again revert to rain
as soon as it has climbed where cold enfolds.

His evil will, which only seeks out evil,
conjoined with intellect; and with the power
his nature grants, he stirred up wind and vapor.

And then, when day was done, he filled the valley
from Pratomagno far as the great ridge
with mist; the sky above was saturated.

The dense air was converted into water;
rain fell, and then the gullies had to carry
whatever water earth could not receive;

and when that rain was gathered into torrents,
it rushed so swiftly toward the royal river
that nothing could contain its turbulence.

The angry Archiano--at its mouth--
had found my frozen body; and it thrust
it in the Arno and set loose the cross

that, on my chest, my arms, in pain, had formed.
It rolled me on the banks and river bed,
then covered, girded me with its debris."

"Pray, after your returning to the world,
when, after your long journeying, you've rested,"
the third soul, following the second, said,

"may you remember me, who am La Pia;
Siena made--Maremma unmade--me:
he who, when we were wed, gave me his pledge

and then, as nuptial ring, his gem, knows that."


## 6
When dicing's done and players separate,
the loser's left alone, disconsolate--
rehearsing what he'd thrown, he sadly learns;

all of the crowd surrounds the one who won--
one goes in front, and one tugs at his back,
and at his side one asks to be remembered;

he does not halt but listens to them all;
and when he gives them something, they desist;
and so he can fend off the pressing throng.

And I, in that persistent pack, was such:
this way and that, I turned my face to them
and, making promises, escaped their clutch.

There was the Aretine who met his death
beneath Ghino di Tacco's bestial hands,
and one who drowned when, in pursuit, he ran.

There, with his outstretched hands, was Federigo
Novello, praying, and the Pisan who
made good Marzucco show his fortitude.

I saw Count Orso, and I saw the soul
cleft from its body out of spite and envy--
not, so it said, because it had been guilty--

I mean Pier de la Brosse (and may the Lady
of Brabant, while she's still in this world, watch
her ways--or end among a sadder flock).

As soon as I was free from all those shades
who always pray for others' prayers for them,
so as to reach their blessed state more quickly,

I started: "O my light, it seems to me
that in one passage you deny expressly
that prayer can bend the rule of Heaven, yet

these people pray precisely for that end.
Is their hope, therefore, only emptiness,
or have I not read clearly what you said?"

And he to me: "My text is plain enough,
and yet their hope is not delusive if
one scrutinizes it with sober wit;

the peak of justice is not lowered when
the fire of love accomplishes in one
instant the expiation owed by all

who dwell here; for where I asserted this--
that prayers could not mend their fault--I spoke
of prayers without a passageway to God.

But in a quandary so deep, do not
conclude with me, but wait for word that she,
the light between your mind and truth, will speak--

lest you misunderstand, the she I mean
is Beatrice; upon this mountain's peak,
there you shall see her smiling joyously."

And I: "Lord, let us move ahead more quickly,
for now I am less weary than before;
and--you can see--the slope now casts a shadow."

"As long as it is day, we'll make as much
headway as possible," he answered; "but
our climb won't be as rapid as you thought.

You will not reach the peak before you see
the sun returning: now he hides behind
the hills--you cannot interrupt his light.

But see--beyond--a soul who is completely
apart, and seated, looking toward us; he
will show us where to climb most speedily."

We came to him. O Lombard soul, what pride
and what disdain were in your stance! Your eyes
moved with such dignity, such gravity!

He said no thing to us but let us pass,
his eyes intent upon us only as
a lion watches when it is at rest.

Yet Virgil made his way to him, appealing
to him to show us how we'd best ascend;
and he did not reply to that request,

but asked us what our country was and who
we were, at which my gentle guide began
"Mantua"--and that spirit, who had been

so solitary, rose from his position,
saying:"O Mantuan, I am Sordello,
from your own land!" And each embraced the other.

Ah, abject Italy, you inn of sorrows,
you ship without a helmsman in harsh seas,
no queen of provinces but of bordellos!

That noble soul had such enthusiasm:
his city's sweet name was enough for him
to welcome--there--his fellow--citizen;

But those who are alive within you now
can't live without their warring--even those
whom one same wall and one same moat enclose

gnaw at each other. Squalid Italy,
search round your shores and then look inland--see
if any part of you delight in peace.

What use was there in a Justinian's
mending your bridle, when the saddle's empty?
Indeed, were there no reins, your shame were less.

Ah you--who if you understood what God
ordained, would then attend to things devout
and in the saddle surely would allow

Caesar to sit--see how this beast turns fierce
because there are no spurs that would correct it,
since you have laid your hands upon the bit!

O German Albert, you who have abandoned
that steed become recalcitrant and savage,
you who should ride astride its saddlebows--

upon your blood may the just judgment of
the stars descend with signs so strange and plain
that your successor has to feel its terror!

For both you and your father, in your greed
for lands that lay more close at hand, allowed
the garden of the Empire to be gutted.

Come--you who pay no heed--do come and see
Montecchi, Cappelletti, sad already,
and, filled with fear, Monaldi, Filippeschi.

Come, cruel one, come see the tribulation
of your nobility and heal their hurts;
see how disconsolate is Santafior!

Come, see your Rome who, widowed and alone,
weeps bitterly; both day and night, she moans:
"My Caesar, why are you not at my side?"

Come, see how much your people love each other!
And if no pity for us moves you, may
shame for your own repute move you to act.

And if I am allowed, o highest Jove,
to ask: You who on earth were crucified
for us--have You turned elsewhere Your just eyes?

Or are You, in Your judgment's depth, devising
a good that we cannot foresee, completely
dissevered from our way of understanding?

For all the towns of Italy are full
of tyrants, and each townsman who becomes
a partisan is soon a new Marcellus.

My Florence, you indeed may be content
that this digression would leave you exempt:
your people's strivings spare you this lament.

Others have justice in their hearts, and thought
is slow to let it fly off from their bow;
but your folk keep it ready--on their lips.

Others refuse the weight of public service;
whereas your people--eagerly--respond,
even unasked, and shout: "I'll take it on."

You might be happy now, for you have cause!
You with your riches, peace, judiciousness!
If I speak truly, facts won't prove me wrong.

Compared to you, Athens and Lacedaemon,
though civil cities, with their ancient laws,
had merely sketched the life of righteousness;

for you devise provisions so ingenious--
whatever threads October sees you spin,
when mid--November comes, will be unspun.

How often, in the time you can remember,
have you changed laws and coinage, offices
and customs, and revised your citizens!

And if your memory has some clarity,
then you will see yourself like that sick woman
who finds no rest upon her feather--bed,

but, turning, tossing, tries to ease her pain.


## 7

When glad and gracious welcomings had been
repeated three and four times, then Sordello
drew himself back and asked: "But who are you?"

"Before the spirits worthy of ascent
to God had been directed to this mountain,
my bones were buried by Octavian.

I am Virgil, and I am deprived of Heaven
for no fault other than my lack of faith."
This was the answer given by my guide.

Even like one who, suddenly, has seen
something before him and then, marveling,
does and does not believe, saying, "It is…

is not," so did Sordello seem, and then
he bent his brow, returned to Virgil humbly,
and clasped him where the lesser presence clasps.

He said: "O glory of the Latins, you
through whom our tongue revealed its power, you,
eternal honor of my native city,

what merit or what grace shows you to me?
If I deserve to hear your word, then answer:
tell me if you're from Hell and from what cloister."

"Through every circle of the sorry kingdom,"
he answered him, "I journeyed here; a power
from Heaven moved me, and with that, I come.

Not for the having--but not having--done,
I lost the sight that you desire, the Sun--
that high Sun I was late in recognizing.

There is a place below that only shadows--
not torments--have assigned to sadness; there,
lament is not an outcry, but a sigh.

There I am with the infant innocents,
those whom the teeth of death had seized before
they were set free from human sinfulness;

there I am with those souls who were not clothed
in the three holy virtues--but who knew
and followed after all the other virtues.

But if you know and you are able to,
would you point out the path that leads more quickly
to the true entry point of Purgatory?"

He answered: "No fixed place has been assigned
to us; I'm free to range about and climb;
as far as I may go, I'll be your guide.

But see now how the day declines; by night
we cannot climb; and therefore it is best
to find some pleasant place where we can rest.

Here to the right are spirits set apart;
if you allow me, I shall lead you to them;
and not without delight, you'll come to know them."

"How is that?" he was asked. "Is it that he
who tried to climb by night would be impeded
by others, or by his own lack of power?"

And good Sordello, as his finger traced
along the ground, said: "Once the sun has set,
then--look--even this line cannot be crossed.

And not that anything except the dark
of night prevents your climbing up; it is
the night itself that implicates your will.

Once darkness falls, one can indeed retreat
below and wander aimlessly about
the slopes, while the horizon has enclosed

the day." At which my lord, as if in wonder,
said: "Lead us then to there where, as you say,
we may derive delight from this night's stay."

We had not gone far off, when I perceived
that, just as valleys hollow mountains here
in our world, so that mountain there was hollowed.

That shade said: "It is there that we shall go--
to where the slope forms, of itself, a lap;
at that place we'll await the new day's coming."

There was a slanting path, now steep, now flat;
it led us to a point beside the valley,
just where its bordering edge had dropped by half.

Gold and fine silver, cochineal, white lead,
and Indian lychnite, highly polished, bright,
fresh emerald at the moment it is dampened,

if placed within that valley, all would be
defeated by the grass and flowers' colors,
just as the lesser gives way to the greater.

And nature there not only was a painter,
but from the sweetness of a thousand odors,
she had derived an unknown, mingled scent.

Upon the green grass and the flowers, I
saw seated spirits singing "Salve, Regina";
they were not visible from the outside.

"Before the meager sun seeks out its nest,"
began the Mantuan who led us here,
"do not ask me to guide you down among them.

From this bank, you'll be better able to
make out the acts and features of them all
than if you were to join them in the hollow.

He who is seated highest, with the look
of one too lax in what he undertook--
whose mouth, although the rest sing, does not move

was Emperor Rudolph, one who could have healed
the wounds that were the death of Italy,
so that another, later, must restore her.

His neighbor, whose appearance comforts him,
governed the land in which are born the waters
the Moldau carries to the Elbe and

the Elbe to the sea: named Ottokar--
in swaddling--bands he was more valiant than
his son, the bearded Wenceslaus, who feeds

on wantonness and ease. That small--nosed man,
who seems so close in counsel with his kindly
friend, died in flight, deflowering the lily:

see how he beats his breast there! And you see
the other shade, who, as he sighs, would rest
his cheek upon his palm as on a bed.

Father and father--in--law of the pest
of France, they know his life--its filth, its vice;
out of that knowledge grows the grief that has

pierced them. That other, who seems so robust
and sings in time with him who has a nose
so manly, wore the cord of every virtue;

and if the young man seated there behind him
had only followed him as king, then valor
might have been poured from vessel unto vessel;

one cannot say this of his other heirs;
his kingdoms now belong to James and Frederick--
but they do not possess his best bequest.

How seldom human worth ascends from branch
to branch, and this is willed by Him who grants
that gift, that one may pray to Him for it!

My words suggest the large--nosed one no less
than they refer to Peter, singing with him,
whose heir brings Puglia and Provence distress:

the plant is lesser than its seed, just as
the man whom Beatrice and Margaret wed
is lesser than the husband Constance has.

You see the king who led the simple life
seated alone: Henry of England--he
has better fortune with his progeny.

He who is seated lowest on the ground,
and looking up, is William the Marquis--
for him, both Alexandria and its war

make Monferrato and Canavese mourn."

## 8
It was the hour that turns seafarers' longings
homeward--the hour that makes their hearts grow tender
upon the day they bid sweet friends farewell;

the hour that pierces the new traveler
with love when he has heard, far off, the bell
that seems to mourn the dying of the day;

when I began to let my hearing fade
and watched one of those souls who, having risen,
had signaled with his hand for our attention.

He joined his palms and, lifting them, he fixed
all his attention on the east, as if
to say to God: "I care for nothing else."

"Te lucis ante" issued from his lips
with such devotion and with notes so sweet
that I was moved to move beyond my mind.

And then the other spirits followed him--
devoutly, gently--through all of that hymn,
their eyes intent on the supernal spheres.

Here, reader, let your eyes look sharp at truth,
for now the veil has grown so very thin--
it is not difficult to pass within.

I saw that company of noble spirits,
silent and looking upward, pale and humble,
as if in expectation; and I saw,

emerging and descending from above,
two angels bearing flaming swords, of which
the blades were broken off, without their tips.

Their garments, just as green as newborn leaves,
were agitated, fanned by their green wings,
and trailed behind them; and one angel came

and stood somewhat above us, while the other
descended on the opposite embankment,
flanking that company of souls between them.

My eyes made out their blond heads clearly, but
my sight was dazzled by their faces--just
like any sense bewildered by excess.

"Both come from Mary's bosom," said Sordello,
"to serve as the custodians of the valley
against the serpent that will soon appear."

At this, not knowing where its path might be,
frozen with fear, I turned around, pressing
close to the trusty shoulders. And Sordello

continued: "Let us now descend among
the great shades in the valley; we shall speak
with them; and seeing you, they will be pleased."

I think that I had taken but three steps
to go below, when I saw one who watched
attentively, trying to recognize me.

The hour had now arrived when air grows dark,
but not so dark that it deprived my eyes
and his of what--before--they were denied.

He moved toward me, and I advanced toward him.
Noble Judge Nino--what delight was mine
when I saw you were not among the damned!

There was no gracious greeting we neglected
before he asked me: "When did you arrive,
across long seas, beneath this mountainside?"

I told him, "Oh, by way of the sad regions,
I came this morning; I am still within
the first life--although, by this journeying,

I earn the other." When they heard my answer,
Sordello and Judge Nino, just behind him,
drew back like people suddenly astonished.

One turned to Virgil, and the other turned
and called to one who sat there: "Up, Currado!
Come see what God, out of His grace, has willed!"

Then, when he turned to me: "By that especial
gratitude you owe to Him who hides
his primal aim so that no human mind

may find the ford to it, when you return
across the wide waves, ask my own Giovanna--
there where the pleas of innocents are answered--

to pray for me. I do not think her mother
still loves me: she gave up her white veils--surely,
poor woman, she will wish them back again.

Through her, one understands so easily
how brief, in woman, is love's fire--when not
rekindled frequently by eye or touch.

The serpent that assigns the Milanese
their camping place will not provide for her
a tomb as fair as would Gallura's rooster."

So Nino spoke; his bearing bore the seal
of that unswerving zeal which, though it flames
within the heart, maintains a sense of measure.

My avid eyes were steadfast, staring at
that portion of the sky where stars are slower,
even as spokes when they approach the axle.

And my guide: "Son, what are you staring at?"
And I replied: "I'm watching those three torches
with which this southern pole is all aflame."

Then he to me: "The four bright stars you saw
this morning now are low, beyond the pole,
and where those four stars were, these three now are."

Even as Virgil spoke, Sordello drew
him to himself: "See there--our adversary!"
he said; and then he pointed with his finger.

At the unguarded edge of that small valley,
there was a serpent--similar, perhaps,
to that which offered Eve the bitter food.

Through grass and flowers the evil streak advanced;
from time to time it turned its head and licked
its back, like any beast that preens and sleeks.

I did not see--and therefore cannot say--
just how the hawks of heaven made their move,
but I indeed saw both of them in motion.

Hearing the green wings cleave the air, the serpent
fled, and the angels wheeled around as each
of them flew upward, back to his high station.

The shade who, when the judge had called, had drawn
closer to him, through all of that attack,
had not removed his eyes from me one moment.

"So may the lantern that leads you on high
discover in your will the wax one needs--
enough for reaching the enameled peak,"

that shade began, "if you have heard true tidings
of Val di Magra or the lands nearby,
tell them to me--for there I once was mighty.

Currado Malaspina was my name;
I'm not the old Currado, but I am
descended from him: to my own I bore

the love that here is purified." I answered: "I
never visited your lands; but can
there be a place in all of Europe where

they are not celebrated? Such renown
honors your house, acclaims your lords and lands--
even if one has yet to journey there.

And so may I complete my climb, I swear
to you: your honored house still claims the prize--
the glory of the purse and of the sword.

Custom and nature privilege it so
that, though the evil head contorts the world,
your kin alone walk straight and shun the path

of wickedness." And he: "Be sure of that.
The sun will not have rested seven times
within the bed that's covered and held fast

by all the Ram's four feet before this gracious
opinion's squarely nailed into your mind
with stouter nails than others' talk provides--

if the divine decree has not been stayed."


## 9
Now she who shares the bed of old Tithonus,
abandoning the arms of her sweet lover,
grew white along the eastern balcony;

the heavens facing her were glittering
with gems set in the semblance of the chill
animal that assails men with its tail;

while night within the valley where we were
had moved across two of the steps it climbs,
and now the third step made night's wings incline;

when I, who bore something of Adam with me,
feeling the need for sleep, lay down upon
the grass where now all five of us were seated.

At that hour close to morning when the swallow
begins her melancholy songs, perhaps
in memory of her ancient sufferings,

when, free to wander farther from the flesh
and less held fast by cares, our intellect's
envisionings become almost divine--

in dream I seemed to see an eagle poised,
with golden pinions, in the sky: its wings
were open; it was ready to swoop down.

And I seemed to be there where Ganymede
deserted his own family when he
was snatched up for the high consistory.

Within myself I thought: "This eagle may
be used to hunting only here; its claws
refuse to carry upward any prey

found elsewhere." Then it seemed to me that, wheeling
slightly and terrible as lightning, it
swooped, snatching me up to the fire's orbit.

And there it seemed that he and I were burning;
and this imagined conflagration scorched
me so--I was compelled to break my sleep.

Just like the waking of Achilles when
he started up, casting his eyes about him,
not knowing where he was (after his mother

had stolen him, asleep, away from Chiron
and in her arms had carried him to Skyros,
the isle the Greeks would-later-make him leave);

such was my starting up, as soon as sleep
had left my eyes, and I went pale, as will
a man who, terrified, turns cold as ice.

The only one beside me was my comfort;
by now the sun was more than two hours high;
it was the sea to which I turned my eyes.

My lord said: "Have no fear; be confident,
for we are well along our way; do not
restrain, but give free rein to, all your strength.

You have already come to Purgatory:
see there the rampart wall enclosing it;
see, where that wall is breached, the point of entry.

Before, at dawn that ushers in the day,
when soul was sleeping in your body, on
the flowers that adorn the ground below,

a lady came; she said: ‘I am Lucia;
let me take hold of him who is asleep,
that I may help to speed him on his way.'

Sordello and the other noble spirits
stayed there; and she took you, and once the day
was bright, she climbed--I following behind.

And here she set you down, but first her lovely
eyes showed that open entryway to me;
then she and sleep together took their leave."

Just like a man in doubt who then grows sure,
exchanging fear for confidence, once truth
has been revealed to him, so was I changed;

and when my guide had seen that I was free
from hesitation, then he moved, with me
behind him, up the rocks and toward the heights.

Reader, you can see clearly how I lift
my matter; do not wonder, therefore, if
I have to call on more art to sustain it.

Now we were drawing closer; we had reached
the part from which--where first I'd seen a breach,
precisely like a gap that cleaves a wall--

I now made out a gate and, there below it,
three steps--their colors different--leading to it,
and a custodian who had not yet spoken.

As I looked more and more directly at him,
I saw him seated on the upper step--
his face so radiant, I could not bear it;

and in his hand he held a naked sword,
which so reflected rays toward us that I,
time and again, tried to sustain that sight

in vain. "Speak out from there; what are you seeking?"
so he began to speak. "Where is your escort?
Take care lest you be harmed by climbing here."

My master answered him: "But just before,
a lady came from Heaven and, familiar
with these things, told us: ‘That's the gate; go there.'"

"And may she speed you on your path of goodness!"
the gracious guardian of the gate began
again. "Come forward, therefore, to our stairs."

There we approached, and the first step was white
marble, so polished and so clear that I
was mirrored there as I appear in life.

The second step, made out of crumbling rock,
rough--textured, scorched, with cracks that ran across
its length and width, was darker than deep purple.

The third, resting above more massively,
appeared to me to be of porphyry,
as flaming red as blood that spurts from veins.

And on this upper step, God's angel--seated
upon the threshold, which appeared to me
to be of adamant--kept his feet planted.

My guide, with much good will, had me ascend
by way of these three steps, enjoining me:
"Do ask him humbly to unbolt the gate."

I threw myself devoutly at his holy
feet, asking him to open out of mercy;
but first I beat three times upon my breast.

Upon my forehead, he traced seven P's
with his sword's point and said: "When you have entered
within, take care to wash away these wounds."

Ashes, or dry earth that has just been quarried,
would share one color with his robe, and from
beneath that robe he drew two keys; the one

was made of gold, the other was of silver;
first with the white, then with the yellow key,
he plied the gate so as to satisfy me.

"Whenever one of these keys fails, not turning
appropriately in the lock," he said
to us, "this gate of entry does not open.

One is more precious, but the other needs
much art and skill before it will unlock--
that is the key that must undo the knot.

These I received from Peter; and he taught me
rather to err in opening than in keeping
this portal shut-whenever souls pray humbly."

Then he pushed back the panels of the holy
gate, saying: "Enter; but I warn you--he
who would look back, returns-again--outside."

And when the panels of that sacred portal,
which are of massive and resounding metal,
turned in their hinges, then even Tarpeia

(when good Metellus was removed from it,
for which that rock was left impoverished)
did not roar so nor show itself so stubborn.

Hearing that gate resound, I turned, attentive;
I seemed to hear, inside, in words that mingled
with gentle music, " Te Deum laudamus."

And what I heard gave me the very same
impression one is used to getting when
one hears a song accompanied by organ,

and now the words are clear and now are lost.


## 10
When I had crossed the threshold of the gate
that--since the soul's aberrant love would make
the crooked way seem straight--is seldom used,

I heard the gate resound and, hearing, knew
that it had shut; and if I'd turned toward it,
how could my fault have found a fit excuse?

Our upward pathway ran between cracked rocks;
they seemed to sway in one, then the other part,
just like a wave that flees, then doubles back.

"Here we shall need some ingenuity,"
my guide warned me, "as both of us draw near
this side or that side where the rock wall veers."

This made our steps so slow and hesitant
that the declining moon had reached its bed
to sink back into rest, before we had

made our way through that needle's eye; but when
we were released from it, in open space
above, a place at which the slope retreats,

I was exhausted; with the two of us
uncertain of our way, we halted on
a plateau lonelier than desert paths.

The distance from its edge, which rims the void,
in to the base of the steep slope, which climbs
and climbs, would measure three times one man's body;

and for as far as my sight took its flight,
now to the left, now to the right--hand side,
that terrace seemed to me equally wide.

There we had yet to let our feet advance
when I discovered that the bordering bank--
less sheer than banks of other terraces--

was of white marble and adorned with carvings
so accurate--not only Polycletus
but even Nature, there, would feel defeated.

The angel who reached earth with the decree
of that peace which, for many years, had been
invoked with tears, the peace that opened Heaven

after long interdict, appeared before us,
his gracious action carved with such precision--
he did not seem to be a silent image.

One would have sworn that he was saying, "Ave";
for in that scene there was the effigy
of one who turned the key that had unlocked

the highest love; and in her stance there were
impressed these words, "Ecce ancilla Dei,"
precisely like a figure stamped in wax.

"Your mind must not attend to just one part,"
the gentle master said--he had me on
the side of him where people have their heart.

At this, I turned my face and saw beyond
the form of Mary--on the side where stood
the one who guided me--another story

engraved upon the rock; therefore I moved
past Virgil and drew close to it, so that
the scene before my eyes was more distinct.

There, carved in that same marble, were the cart
and oxen as they drew the sacred ark,
which makes men now fear tasks not in their charge.

People were shown in front; and all that group,
divided into seven choirs, made
two of my senses speak--one sense said, "No,"

the other said, "Yes, they do sing"; just so,
about the incense smoke shown there, my nose
and eyes contended, too, with yes and no.

And there the humble psalmist went before
the sacred vessel, dancing, lifting up
his robe--he was both less and more than king.

Facing that scene, and shown as at the window
of a great palace, Michal watched as would
a woman full of scorn and suffering.

To look more closely at another carving,
which I saw gleaming white beyond Michal,
my feet moved past the point where I had stood.

And there the noble action of a Roman
prince was presented--he whose worth had urged
on Gregory to his great victory--

I mean the Emperor Trajan; and a poor
widow was near his bridle, and she stood
even as one in tears and sadness would.

Around him, horsemen seemed to press and crowd;
above their heads, on golden banners, eagles
were represented, moving in the wind.

Among that crowd, the miserable woman
seemed to be saying: "Lord, avenge me for
the slaying of my son--my heart is broken."

And he was answering: "Wait now until
I have returned." And she, as one in whom
grief presses urgently: "And, lord, if you

do not return?" And he: "The one who'll be
in my place will perform it for you." She:
"What good can others' goodness do for you

if you neglect your own?" He: "Be consoled;
my duty shall be done before I go:
so justice asks, so mercy makes me stay."

This was the speech made visible by One
within whose sight no thing is new--but we,
who lack its likeness here, find novelty.

While I took much delight in witnessing
these effigies of true humility--
dear, too, to see because He was their Maker--

the poet murmured: "See the multitude
advancing, though with slow steps, on this side:
they will direct us to the higher stairs."

My eyes, which had been satisfied in seeking
new sights--a thing for which they long--did not
delay in turning toward him. But I would

not have you, reader, be deflected from
your good resolve by hearing from me now
how God would have us pay the debt we owe.

Don't dwell upon the form of punishment:
consider what comes after that; at worst
it cannot last beyond the final Judgment.

"Master," I said, "what I see moving toward us
does not appear to me like people, but
I can't tell what is there--my sight's bewildered."

And he to me: "Whatever makes them suffer
their heavy torment bends them to the ground;
at first I was unsure of what they were.

But look intently there, and let your eyes
unravel what's beneath those stones: you can
already see what penalty strikes each."

O Christians, arrogant, exhausted, wretched,
whose intellects are sick and cannot see,
who place your confidence in backward steps,

do you not know that we are worms and born
to form the angelic butterfly that soars,
without defenses, to confront His judgment?

Why does your mind presume to flight when you
are still like the imperfect grub, the worm
before it has attained its final form?

Just as one sees at times--as corbel for
support of ceiling or of roof--a figure
with knees drawn up into its chest (and this

oppressiveness, unreal, gives rise to real
distress in him who watches it): such was
the state of those I saw when I looked hard.

They were indeed bent down--some less, some more--
according to the weights their backs now bore;
and even he whose aspect showed most patience,

in tears, appeared to say: "I can no more."


## 11

"Our Father, You who dwell within the heavens-
 but are not circumscribed by them-out of
 Your greater love for Your first works above,

 praised be Your name and Your omnipotence,
 by every creature, just as it is seemly
 to offer thanks to Your sweet effluence.

 Your kingdom's peace come unto us, for if
 it does not come, then though we summon all
 our force, we cannot reach it of our selves.

 Just as Your angels, as they sing Hosanna,
 offer their wills to You as sacrifice,
 so may men offer up their wills to You.

 Give unto us this day the daily manna
 without which he who labors most to move
 ahead through this harsh wilderness falls back.

 Even as we forgive all who have done
 us injury, may You, benevolent,
 forgive, and do not judge us by our worth.

 Try not our strength, so easily subdued,
 against the ancient foe, but set it free
 from him who goads it to perversity.

 This last request we now address to You,
 dear Lord, not for ourselves-who have no need-
 but for the ones whom we have left behind."

 Beseeching, thus, good penitence for us
 and for themselves, those shades moved on beneath
 their weights, like those we sometimes bear in dreams-

 each in his own degree of suffering
 but all, exhausted, circling the first terrace,
 purging themselves of this world's scoriae.

 If there they pray on our behalf, what can
 be said and done here on this earth for them
 by those whose wills are rooted in true worth?

 Indeed we should help them to wash away
 the stains they carried from this world, so that,
 made pure and light, they reach the starry wheels.

 "Ah, so may justice and compassion soon
 unburden you, so that your wings may move
 as you desire them to, and uplift you,

 show us on which hand lies the shortest path
 to reach the stairs; if there is more than one
 passage, then show us that which is less steep;

 for he who comes with me, because he wears
 the weight of Adam's flesh as dress, despite
 his ready will, is slow in his ascent."

 These words, which had been spoken by my guide,
 were answered by still other words we heard;
 for though it was not clear who had replied,

 an answer came: "Come with us to the right
 along the wall of rock, and you will find
 a pass where even one alive can climb.

 And were I not impeded by the stone
 that, since it has subdued my haughty neck,
 compels my eyes to look below, then I

 should look at this man who is still alive
 and nameless, to see if I recognize
 him-and to move his pity for my burden.

 I was Italian, son of a great Tuscan:
 my father was Guiglielmo Aldobrandesco;
 I do not know if you have heard his name.

 The ancient blood and splendid deeds of my
 forefathers made me so presumptuous
 that, without thinking on our common mother,

 I scorned all men past measure, and that scorn
 brought me my death-the Sienese know how,
 as does each child in Campagnatico.

 I am Omberto; and my arrogance
 has not harmed me alone, for it has drawn
 all of my kin into calamity.

 Until God has been satisfied, I bear
 this burden here among the dead because
 I did not bear this load among the living."

 My face was lowered as I listened; and
 one of those souls-not he who'd spoken-twisted
 himself beneath the weight that burdened them;

 he saw and knew me and called out to me,
 fixing his eyes on me laboriously
 as I, completely hunched, walked on with them.

 "Oh," I cried out, "are you not Oderisi,
 glory of Gubbio, glory of that art
 they call illumination now in Paris?"

 "Brother," he said, "the pages painted by
 the brush of Franco Bolognese smile
 more brightly: all the glory now is his;

 mine, but a part. In truth I would have been
 less gracious when I lived-so great was that
 desire for eminence which drove my heart.

 For such pride, here one pays the penalty;
 and I'd not be here yet, had it not been
 that, while I still could sin, I turned to Him.

 O empty glory of the powers of humans!
 How briefly green endures upon the peak-
 unless an age of dullness follows it.

 In painting Cimabue thought he held
 the field, and now it's Giotto they acclaim-
 the former only keeps a shadowed fame.

 So did one Guido, from the other, wrest
 the glory of our tongue-and he perhaps
 is born who will chase both out of the nest.

 Worldly renown is nothing other than
 a breath of wind that blows now here, now there,
 and changes name when it has changed its course.

 Before a thousand years have passed-a span
 that, for eternity, is less space than
 an eyeblink for the slowest sphere in heaven-

 would you find greater glory if you left
 your flesh when it was old than if your death
 had come before your infant words were spent?

 All Tuscany acclaimed his name-the man
 who moves so slowly on the path before me,
 and now they scarcely whisper of him even

 in Siena, where he lorded it when they
 destroyed the raging mob of Florence-then
 as arrogant as now it's prostitute.

 Your glory wears the color of the grass
 that comes and goes; the sun that makes it wither
 first drew it from the ground, still green and tender."

 And I to him: "Your truthful speech has filled
 my soul with sound humility, abating
 my overswollen pride; but who is he

 of whom you spoke now?" "Provenzan Salvani,
 he answered, "here because-presumptuously-"
 he thought his grip could master all Siena.

 So he has gone, and so he goes, with no
 rest since his death; this is the penalty
 exacted from those who-there-overreached."

 And I: "But if a spirit who awaits
 the edge of life before repenting must-
 unless good prayers help him-stay below

 and not ascend here for as long a time
 as he had spent alive, do tell me how
 Salvani's entry here has been allowed."

 "When he was living in his greatest glory"
 said he, "then of his own free will he set
 aside all shame and took his place upon

 the Campo of Siena; there, to free
 his friend from suffering in Charles's prison,
 humbling himself, he trembled in each vein.

 I say no more; I know I speak obscurely;
 but soon enough you'll find your neighbor's acts
 are such that what I say can be explained.

 This deed delivered him from those confines."


## 12

As oxen, yoked, proceed abreast, so I
moved with that burdened soul as long as my
kind pedagogue allowed me to; but when

he said: "Leave him behind, and go ahead;
for here it's fitting that with wings and oars
each urge his boat along with all his force,"

I drew my body up again, erect--
the stance most suitable to man--and yet
the thoughts I thought were still submissive, bent.

Now I was on my way, and willingly
I followed in my teacher's steps, and we
together showed what speed we could command.

He said to me: "Look downward, for the way
will offer you some solace if you pay
attention to the pavement at your feet."

As, on the lids of pavement tombs, there are
stone effigies of what the buried were
before, so that the dead may be remembered;

and there, when memory--inciting only
the pious--has renewed their mourning, men
are often led to shed their tears again;

so did I see, but carved more skillfully,
with greater sense of likeness, effigies
on all the path protruding from the mountain.

I saw, to one side of the path, one who
had been created nobler than all other
beings, falling lightning--like from Heaven.

I saw, upon the other side, Briareus
transfixed by the celestial shaft: he lay,
ponderous, on the ground, in fatal cold.

I saw Thymbraeus, I saw Mars and Pallas,
still armed, as they surrounded Jove, their father,
gazing upon the Giants' scattered limbs.

I saw bewildered Nimrod at the foot
of his great labor; watching him were those
of Shinar who had shared his arrogance.

O Niobe, what tears afflicted me
when, on that path, I saw your effigy
among your slaughtered children, seven and seven!

O Saul, you were portrayed there as one who
had died on his own sword, upon Gilboa,
which never after knew the rain, the dew!

O mad Arachne, I saw you already
half spider, wretched on the ragged remnants
of work that you had wrought to your own hurt!

O Rehoboam, you whose effigy
seems not to menace there, and yet you flee
by chariot, terrified, though none pursues!

It also showed-that pavement of hard stone--
how much Alcmaeon made his mother pay:
the cost of the ill--omened ornament.

It showed the children of Sennacherib
as they assailed their father in the temple,
then left him, dead, behind them as they fled.

It showed the slaughter and the devastation
wrought by Tomyris when she taunted Cyrus:
"You thirsted after blood; with blood I fill you."

It showed the rout of the Assyrians,
sent reeling after Holofernes' death,
and also showed his body--what was left.

I saw Troy turned to caverns and to ashes;
O Ilium, your effigy in stone--
it showed you there so squalid, so cast down!

What master of the brush or of the stylus
had there portrayed such masses, such outlines
as would astonish all discerning minds?

The dead seemed dead and the alive, alive:
I saw, head bent, treading those effigies,
as well as those who'd seen those scenes directly.

Now, sons of Eve, persist in arrogance,
in haughty stance, do not let your eyes bend,
lest you be forced to see your evil path!

We now had circled round more of the mountain
and much more of the sun's course had been crossed
than I, my mind absorbed, had gauged, when he

who always looked ahead insistently,
as he advanced, began: "Lift up your eyes;
it's time to set these images aside.

See there an angel hurrying to meet us,
and also see the sixth of the handmaidens
returning from her service to the day.

Adorn your face and acts with reverence,
that he be pleased to send us higher. Remember--
today will never know another dawn."

I was so used to his insistent warnings
against the loss of time; concerning that,
his words to me could hardly be obscure.

That handsome creature came toward us; his clothes
were white, and in his aspect he seemed like
the trembling star that rises in the morning.

He opened wide his arms, then spread his wings;
he said: "Approach: the steps are close at hand;
from this point on one can climb easily.

This invitation's answered by so few:
o humankind, born for the upward flight,
why are you driven back by wind so slight?"

He led us to a cleft within the rock,
and then he struck my forehead with his wing;
that done, he promised me safe journeying.

As on the right, when one ascends the hill
where--over Rubaconte's bridge--there stands
the church that dominates the well--ruled city,

the daring slope of the ascent is broken
by steps that were constructed in an age
when record books and measures could be trusted,

so was the slope that plummets there so steeply
down from the other ring made easier;
but on this side and that, high rock encroaches.

While we began to move in that direction,
"Beati pauperes spiritu" was sung
so sweetly--it can not be told in words.

How different were these entryways from those
of Hell! For here it is with song one enters;
down there, it is with savage lamentations.

Now we ascended by the sacred stairs,
but I seemed to be much more light than I
had been, before, along the level terrace.

At this I asked: "Master, tell me, what heavy
weight has been lifted from me, so that I,
in going, notice almost no fatigue?"

He answered: "When the P's that still remain
upon your brow--now almost all are faint--
have been completely, like this P. erased,

your feet will be so mastered by good will
that they not only will not feel travail
but will delight when they are urged uphill."

Then I behaved like those who make their way
with something on their head of which they're not
aware, till others' signs make them suspicious,

at which, the hand helps them to ascertain;
it seeks and finds and touches and provides
the services that sight cannot supply;

so, with my right hand's outspread fingers, I
found just six of the letters once inscribed
by him who holds the keys, upon my forehead;

and as he watched me do this, my guide smiled.


## 13

We now had reached the summit of the stairs
where once again the mountain whose ascent
delivers man from sin has been indented.

There, just as in the case of the first terrace,
a second terrace runs around the slope,
except that it describes a sharper arc.

No effigy is there and no outline:
the bank is visible, the naked path--
only the livid color of raw rock.

"If we wait here in order to inquire
of those who pass," the poet said, "I fear
our choice of path may be delayed too long."

And then he fixed his eyes upon the sun;
letting his right side serve to guide his movement,
he wheeled his left around and changed direction.

"O gentle light, through trust in which I enter
on this new path, may you conduct us here,"
he said, "for men need guidance in this place.

You warm the world and you illumine it;
unless a higher Power urge us elsewhere,
your rays must always be the guides that lead."

We had already journeyed there as far
as we should reckon here to be a mile,
and done it in brief time--our will was eager--

when we heard spirits as they flew toward us,
though they could not be seen--spirits pronouncing
courteous invitations to love's table.

The first voice that flew by called out aloud:
"Vinum non habent," and behind us that
same voice reiterated its example.

And as that voice drew farther off, before
it faded finally, another cried:
"I am Orestes." It, too, did not stop.

"What voices are these, father?" were my words;
and as I asked him this, I heard a third
voice say: "Love those by whom you have been hurt."

And my good master said: "The sin of envy
is scourged within this circle; thus, the cords
that form the scourging lash are plied by love.

The sounds of punished envy, envy curbed,
are different; if I judge right, you'll hear
those sounds before we reach the pass of pardon.

But let your eyes be fixed attentively
and, through the air, you will see people seated
before us, all of them on the stone terrace."

I opened--wider than before--my eyes;
I looked ahead of me, and I saw shades
with cloaks that shared their color with the rocks.

And once we'd moved a little farther on,
I heard the cry of, "Mary, pray for us,"
and then heard, "Michael," "Peter," and "All saints."

I think no man now walks upon the earth
who is so hard that he would not have been
pierced by compassion for what I saw next;

for when I had drawn close enough to see
clearly the way they paid their penalty,
the force of grief pressed tears out of my eyes.

Those souls--it seemed--were cloaked in coarse haircloth;
another's shoulder served each shade as prop,
and all of them were bolstered by the rocks:

so do the blind who have to beg appear
on pardon days to plead for what they need,
each bending his head back and toward the other,

that all who watch feel--quickly--pity's touch
not only through the words that would entreat
but through the sight, which can--no less--beseech.

And just as, to the blind, no sun appears,
so to the shades--of whom I now speak--here,
the light of heaven would not give itself;

for iron wire pierces and sews up
the lids of all those shades, as untamed hawks
are handled, lest, too restless, they fly off.

It seemed to me a gross discourtesy
for me, going, to see and not be seen;
therefore, I turned to my wise counselor.

He knew quite well what I, though mute, had meant;
and thus he did not wait for my request,
but said: "Speak, and be brief and to the point."

Virgil was to my right, along the outside,
nearer the terrace--edge--no parapet
was there to keep a man from falling off;

and to my other side were the devout
shades; through their eyes, sewn so atrociously,
those spirits forced the tears that bathed their cheeks.

I turned to them; and "You who can be certain,"
I then began, "of seeing that high light
which is the only object of your longing,

may, in your conscience, all impurity
soon be dissolved by grace, so that the stream
of memory flow through it limpidly;

tell me, for I shall welcome such dear words,
if any soul among you is Italian;
if I know that, then I--perhaps--can help him."

"My brother, each of us is citizen
of one true city: what you meant to say
was ‘one who lived in Italy as pilgrim.'"

My hearing placed the point from which this answer
had come somewhat ahead of me; therefore,
I made myself heard farther on; moving,

I saw one shade among the rest who looked
expectant; and if any should ask how--
its chin was lifted as a blind man's is.

"Spirit," I said, "who have subdued yourself
that you may climb, if it is you who answered,
then let me know you by your place or name."

"I was a Sienese," she answered, "and
with others here I mend my wicked life,
weeping to Him that He grant us Himself.

I was not sapient, though I was called Sapia;
and I rejoiced far more at others' hurts
than at my own good fortune. And lest you

should think I have deceived you, hear and judge
if I was not, as I have told you, mad
when my years' arc had reached its downward part.

My fellow citizens were close to Colle,
where they'd joined battle with their enemies,
and I prayed God for that which He had willed.

There they were routed, beaten; they were reeling
along the bitter paths of flight; and seeing
that chase, I felt incomparable joy,

so that I lifted up my daring face
and cried to God: ‘Now I fear you no more!'--
as did the blackbird after brief fair weather.

I looked for peace with God at my life's end;
the penalty I owe for sin would not
be lessened now by penitence had not

one who was sorrowing for me because
of charity in him--Pier Pettinaio--
remembered me in his devout petitions.

But who are you, who question our condition
as you move on, whose eyes--if I judge right--
have not been sewn, who uses breath to speak?"

"My eyes," I said, "will be denied me here,
but only briefly; the offense of envy
was not committed often by their gaze.

I fear much more the punishment below;
my soul is anxious, in suspense; already
I feel the heavy weights of the first terrace."

And she: "Who, then, led you up here among us,
if you believe you will return below?"
And I: "He who is with me and is silent.

I am alive; and therefore, chosen spirit,
if you would have me move my mortal steps
on your behalf, beyond, ask me for that."

"Oh, this," she answered, "is so strange a thing
to hear: the sign is clear--you have God's love.
Thus, help me sometimes with your prayers. I ask

of you, by that which you desire most,
if you should ever tread the Tuscan earth,
to see my name restored among my kin.

You will see them among those vain ones who
have put their trust in Talamone (their loss
in hope will be more than Diana cost);

but there the admirals will lose the most."

## 14

"Who is this man who, although death has yet
to grant him flight, can circle round our mountain,
and can, at will, open and shut his eyes?"

"I don't know who he is, but I do know
he's not alone; you're closer; question him
and greet him gently, so that he replies."

So were two spirits, leaning toward each other,
discussing me, along my right--hand side;
then they bent back their heads to speak to me,

and one began: "O soul who--still enclosed
within the body--make your way toward Heaven,
may you, through love, console us; tell us who

you are, from where you come; the grace that you've
received--a thing that's never come to pass
before--has caused us much astonishment."

And I: "Through central Tuscany there spreads
a little stream first born in Falterona;
one hundred miles can't fill the course it needs.

I bring this body from that river's banks;
to tell you who I am would be to speak
in vain--my name has not yet gained much fame."

"If, with my understanding, I have seized
your meaning properly," replied to me
the one who'd spoken first, "you mean the Arno."

The other said to him: "Why did he hide
that river's name, even as one would do
in hiding something horrible from view?"

The shade to whom this question was addressed
repaid with this: "I do not know; but it
is right for such a valley's name to perish,

for from its source (at which the rugged chain--
from which Pelorus was cut off--surpasses
most other places with its mass of mountains)

until its end point (where it offers back
those waters that evaporating skies
drew from the sea, that streams may be supplied),

virtue is seen as serpent, and all flee
from it as if it were an enemy,
either because the site is ill--starred or

their evil custom goads them so; therefore,
the nature of that squalid valley's people
has changed, as if they were in Circe's pasture.

That river starts its miserable course
among foul hogs, more fit for acorns than
for food devised to serve the needs of man.

Then, as that stream descends, it comes on curs
that, though their force is feeble, snap and snarl;
scornful of them, it swerves its snout away.

And, downward, it flows on; and when that ditch,
ill-fated and accursed, grows wider, it
finds, more and more, the dogs becoming wolves.

Descending then through many dark ravines,
it comes on foxes so full of deceit--
there is no trap that they cannot defeat.

Nor will I keep from speech because my comrade
hears me (and it will serve you, too, to keep
in mind what prophecy reveals to me).

I see your grandson: he's become a hunter
of wolves along the banks of the fierce river,
and he strikes every one of them with terror.

He sells their flesh while they are still alive;
then, like an ancient beast, he turns to slaughter,
depriving many of life, himself of honor.

Bloody, he comes out from the wood he's plundered,
leaving it such that in a thousand years
it will not be the forest that it was."

Just as the face of one who has heard word
of pain and injury becomes perturbed,
no matter from what side that menace stirs,

so did I see that other soul, who'd turned
to listen, growing anxious and dejected
when he had taken in his comrade's words.

The speech of one, the aspect of the other
had made me need to know their names, and I
both queried and beseeched at the same time,

at which the spirit who had spoken first
to me began again: "You'd have me do
for you that which, to me, you have refused.

But since God would, in you, have His grace glow
so brightly, I shall not be miserly;
know, therefore, that I was Guido del Duca.

My blood was so afire with envy that,
when I had seen a man becoming happy,
the lividness in me was plain to see.

From what I've sown, this is the straw I reap:
o humankind, why do you set your hearts
there where our sharing cannot have a part?

This is Rinieri, this is he--the glory,
the honor of the house of Calboli;
but no one has inherited his worth.

It's not his kin alone, between the Po
and mountains, and the Reno and the coast,
who've lost the truth's grave good and lost the good

of gentle living, too; those lands are full
of poisoned stumps; by now, however much
one were to cultivate, it is too late.

Where is good Lizio? Arrigo Mainardi?
Pier Traversaro? Guido di Carpigna?
O Romagnoles returned to bastardy!

When will a Fabbro flourish in Bologna?
When, in Faenza, a Bernadin di Fosco,
the noble offshoot of a humble plant?

Don't wonder, Tuscan, if I weep when I
remember Ugolino d'Azzo, one
who lived among us, and Guido da Prata,

the house of Traversara, of Anastagi
(both houses without heirs), and Federigo
Tignoso and his gracious company,

the ladies and the knights, labors and leisure
to which we once were urged by courtesy
and love, where hearts now host perversity.

O Bretinoro, why do you not flee--
when you've already lost your family
and many men who've fled iniquity?

Bagnacaval does well: it breeds no more--
and Castrocuro ill, and Conio worse,
for it insists on breeding counts so cursed.

Once freed of their own demon, the Pagani
will do quite well, but not so well that any
will testify that they are pure and worthy.

Your name, o Ugolin de' Fantolini,
is safe, since one no longer waits for heirs
to blacken it with their degeneracy.

But, Tuscan, go your way; I am more pleased
to weep now than to speak: for that which we
have spoken presses heavily on me!"

We knew those gentle souls had heard us move
away; therefore, their silence made us feel
more confident about the path we took.

When we, who'd gone ahead, were left alone,
a voice that seemed like lightning as it splits
the air encountered us, a voice that said:

"Whoever captures me will slaughter me";
and then it fled like thunder when it fades
after the cloud is suddenly ripped through.

As soon as that first voice had granted us
a truce, another voice cried out with such
uproar--like thunder quick to follow thunder:

"I am Aglauros, who was turned to stone";
and then, to draw more near the poet, I
moved to my right instead of moving forward.

By now the air on every side was quiet;
and he told me: "That is the sturdy bit
that should hold every man within his limits.

But you would take the bait, so that the hook
of the old adversary draws you to him;
thus, neither spur nor curb can serve to save you.

Heaven would call--and it encircles--you;
it lets you see its never--ending beauties;
and yet your eyes would only see the ground;

thus, He who sees all things would strike you down."

## 15

As many as the hours in which the sphere
that's always playing like a child appears
from daybreak to the end of the third hour,

so many were the hours of light still left
before the course of day had reached sunset;
vespers was there; and where we are, midnight.

When sunlight struck directly at our faces,
for we had circled so much of the mountain
that now we headed straight into the west,

then I could feel my vision overcome
by radiance greater than I'd sensed before,
and unaccounted things left me amazed;

at which, that they might serve me as a shade,
I lifted up my hands above my brow,
to limit some of that excessive splendor.

As when a ray of light, from water or
a mirror, leaps in the opposed direction
and rises at an angle equal to

its angle of descent, and to each side
the distance from the vertical is equal,
as science and experiment have shown;

so did it seem to me that I had been
struck there by light reflected, facing me,
at which my eyes turned elsewhere rapidly.

"Kind father, what is that against which I
have tried in vain," I said, "to screen my eyes?
It seems to move toward us." And he replied:

"Don't wonder if you are still dazzled by
the family of Heaven: a messenger
has come, and he invites us to ascend.

Soon, in the sight of such things, there will be
no difficulty for you, but delight--
as much as nature fashioned you to feel."

No sooner had we reached the blessed angel
than with glad voice he told us: "Enter here;
these are less steep than were the other stairs."

We climbed, already past that point; behind us,
we heard "Beati misericordes" sung
and then "Rejoice, you who have overcome."

I and my master journeyed on alone,
we two together, upward; as we walked,
I thought I'd gather profit from his words;

and even as I turned toward him, I asked:
"What did the spirit of Romagna mean
when he said, ‘Sharing cannot have a part'?"

And his reply: "He knows the harm that lies
in his worst vice; if he chastises it,
to ease its expiation--do not wonder.

For when your longings center on things such
that sharing them apportions less to each,
then envy stirs the bellows of your sighs.

But if the love within the Highest Sphere
should turn your longings heavenward, the fear
inhabiting your breast would disappear;

for there, the more there are who would say ‘ours,'
so much the greater is the good possessed
by each--so much more love burns in that cloister."

"I am more hungry now for satisfaction"
I said, "than if I'd held my tongue before;
I host a deeper doubt within my mind.

How can a good that's shared by more possessors
enable each to be more rich in it
than if that good had been possessed by few?"

And he to me: "But if you still persist
in letting your mind fix on earthly things,
then even from true light you gather darkness.

That Good, ineffable and infinite,
which is above, directs Itself toward love
as light directs itself to polished bodies.

Where ardor is, that Good gives of Itself;
and where more love is, there that Good confers
a greater measure of eternal worth.

And when there are more souls above who love,
there's more to love well there, and they love more,
and, mirror--like, each soul reflects the other.

And if my speech has not appeased your hunger,
you will see Beatrice--she will fulfill
this and all other longings that you feel.

Now only strive, so that the other five
wounds may be canceled quickly, as the two
already are--the wounds contrition heals."

But wanting then to say, "You have appeased me,"
I saw that I had reached another circle,
and my desiring eyes made me keep still.

There I seemed, suddenly, to be caught up
in an ecstatic vision and to see
some people in a temple; and a woman

just at the threshold, in the gentle manner
that mothers use, was saying: "O my son,
why have you done this to us? You can see

how we have sought you--sorrowing, your father
and I." And at this point, as she fell still,
what had appeared at first now disappeared.

Then there appeared to me another woman:
upon her cheeks--the tears that grief distills
when it is born of much scorn for another.

She said: "If you are ruler of that city
to name which even goddesses once vied--
where every science had its source of light--

revenge yourself on the presumptuous
arms that embraced our daughter, o Pisistratus."
And her lord seemed to me benign and mild,

his aspect temperate, as he replied:
"What shall we do to one who'd injure us
if one who loves us earns our condemnation?"

Next I saw people whom the fire of wrath
had kindled, as they stoned a youth and kept
on shouting loudly to each other: "Kill!"

"Kill!" "Kill!" I saw him now, weighed down by death,
sink to the ground, although his eyes were bent
always on Heaven--they were Heaven's gates--

praying to his high Lord, despite the torture,
to pardon those who were his persecutors;
his look was such that it unlocked compassion.

And when my soul returned outside itself
and met the things outside it that are real,
I then could recognize my not false errors.

My guide, on seeing me behave as if
I were a man who's freed himself from sleep,
said: "What is wrong with you? You can't walk straight;

for more than half a league now you have moved
with clouded eyes and lurching legs, as if
you were a man whom wine or sleep has gripped!"

"Oh, my kind father, if you hear me out,
I'll tell you what appeared to me," I said,
"when I had lost the right use of my legs."

And he: "Although you had a hundred masks
upon your face, that still would not conceal
from me the thoughts you thought, however slight.

What you have seen was shown lest you refuse
to open up your heart unto the waters
of peace that pour from the eternal fountain.

I did not ask ‘What's wrong with you?' as one
who only sees with earthly eyes, which--once
the body, stripped of soul, lies dead--can't see;

I asked so that your feet might find more force:
so must one urge the indolent, too slow
to use their waking time when it returns."

We made our way until the end of vespers,
peering, as far ahead as sight could stretch,
at rays of light that, although late, were bright.

But, gradually, smoke as black as night
began to overtake us; and there was
no place where we could have avoided it.

This smoke deprived us of pure air and sight.

## 16

Darkness of Hell and of a night deprived
of every planet, under meager skies,
as overcast by clouds as sky can be,

had never served to veil my eyes so thickly
nor covered them with such rough--textured stuff
as smoke that wrapped us there in Purgatory;

my eyes could not endure remaining open;
so that my faithful, knowledgeable escort
drew closer as he offered me his shoulder.

Just as a blind man moves behind his guide,
that he not stray or strike against some thing
that may do damage to--or even kill--him,

so I moved through the bitter, filthy air,
while listening to my guide, who kept repeating:
"Take care that you are not cut off from me."

But I heard voices, and each seemed to pray
unto the Lamb of God, who takes away
our sins, for peace and mercy. "Agnus Dei"

was sung repeatedly as their exordium,
words sung in such a way--in unison--
that fullest concord seemed to be among them.

"Master, are those whom I hear, spirits?" I
asked him. "You have grasped rightly," he replied,
"and as they go they loose the knot of anger."

"Then who are you whose body pierces through
our smoke, who speak of us exactly like
a man who uses months to measure time?"

A voice said this. On hearing it, my master
turned round to me: "Reply to him, then ask
if this way leads us to the upward path."

And I: "O creature who--that you return
fair unto Him who made you--cleanse yourself,
you shall hear wonders if you follow me."

"I'll follow you as far as I'm allowed,"
he answered, "and if smoke won't let us see,
hearing will serve instead to keep us linked."

Then I began: "With those same swaddling--bands
that death unwinds I take my upward path:
I have come here by way of Hell's exactions;

since God's so gathered me into His grace
that He would have me, in a manner most
unusual for moderns, see His court,

do not conceal from me who you once were,
before your death, and tell me if I go
straight to the pass; your words will be our escort."

"I was a Lombard and I was called Marco;
I knew the world's ways, and I loved those goods
for which the bows of all men now grow slack.

The way you've taken leads directly upward."
So he replied, and then he added: "I
pray you to pray for me when you're above."

And I to him: "I pledge my faith to you
to do what you have asked; and yet a doubt
will burst in me if it finds no way out.

Before, my doubt was simple; but your statement
has doubled it and made me sure that I
am right to couple your words with another's.

The world indeed has been stripped utterly
of every virtue; as you said to me,
it cloaks-and is cloaked by--perversity.

Some place the cause in heaven, some, below;
but I beseech you to define the cause,
that, seeing it, I may show it to others."

A sigh, from which his sorrow formed an "Oh,"
was his beginning; then he answered: "Brother,
the world is blind, and you come from the world.

You living ones continue to assign
to heaven every cause, as if it were
the necessary source of every motion.

If this were so, then your free will would be
destroyed, and there would be no equity
in joy for doing good, in grief for evil.

The heavens set your appetites in motion--
not all your appetites, but even if
that were the case, you have received both light

on good and evil, and free will, which though
it struggle in its first wars with the heavens,
then conquers all, if it has been well nurtured.

On greater power and a better nature
you, who are free, depend; that Force engenders
the mind in you, outside the heavens' sway.

Thus, if the present world has gone astray,
in you is the cause, in you it's to be sought;
and now I'll serve as your true exegete.

Issuing from His hands, the soul--on which
He thought with love before creating it--
is like a child who weeps and laughs in sport;

that soul is simple, unaware; but since
a joyful Maker gave it motion, it
turns willingly to things that bring delight.

At first it savors trivial goods; these would
beguile the soul, and it runs after them,
unless there's guide or rein to rule its love.

Therefore, one needed law to serve as curb;
a ruler, too, was needed, one who could
discern at least the tower of the true city.

The laws exist, but who applies them now?
No one--the shepherd who precedes his flock
can chew the cud but does not have cleft hooves;

and thus the people, who can see their guide
snatch only at that good for which they feel
some greed, would feed on that and seek no further.

Misrule, you see, has caused the world to be
malevolent; the cause is clearly not
celestial forces--they do not corrupt.

For Rome, which made the world good, used to have
two suns; and they made visible two paths--
the world's path and the pathway that is God's.

Each has eclipsed the other; now the sword
has joined the shepherd's crook; the two together
must of necessity result in evil,

because, so joined, one need not fear the other:
and if you doubt me, watch the fruit and flower,
for every plant is known by what it seeds.

Within the territory watered by
the Adige and Po, one used to find
valor and courtesy--that is, before

Frederick was met by strife; now anyone
ashamed of talking with the righteous or
of meeting them can journey there, secure.

True, three old men are there, in whom old times
reprove the new; and they find God is slow
in summoning them to a better life:

Currado da Palazzo, good Gherardo,
and Guido da Castel, whom it is better
to call, as do the French, the candid Lombard.

You can conclude: the Church of Rome confounds
two powers in itself; into the filth,
it falls and fouls itself and its new burden."

"Good Marco," I replied, "you reason well;
and now I understand why Levi's sons were
not allowed to share in legacies.

But what Gherardo is this whom you mention
as an example of the vanished people
whose presence would reproach this savage age?"

"Either your speech deceives me or would tempt me,"
he answered then, "for you, whose speech is Tuscan,
seem to know nothing of the good Gherardo.

There is no other name by which I know him,
unless I speak of him as Gaia's father.
God be with you; I come with you no farther.

You see the rays that penetrate the smoke
already whitening; I must take leave--
the angel has arrived--before he sees me."

So he turned back and would not hear me more.

## 17

Remember, reader, if you've ever been
caught in the mountains by a mist through which
you only saw as moles see through their skin,

how, when the thick, damp vapors once begin
to thin, the sun's sphere passes feebly through them,
then your imagination will be quick

to reach the point where it can see how I
first came to see the sun again--when it
was almost at the point at which it sets.

So, my steps matched my master's trusty steps;
out of that cloud I came, reaching the rays
that, on the shores below, by now were spent.

O fantasy, you that at times would snatch
us so from outward things--we notice nothing
although a thousand trumpets sound around us--

who moves you when the senses do not spur you?
A light that finds its form in Heaven moves you--
directly or led downward by God's will.

Within my fantasy I saw impressed
the savagery of one who then, transformed,
became the bird that most delights in song;

at this, my mind withdrew to the within,
to what imagining might bring; no thing
that came from the without could enter in.

Then into my deep fantasy there rained
one who was crucified; and as he died,
he showed his savagery and his disdain.

Around him were great Ahasuerus and
Esther his wife, and the just Mordecai,
whose saying and whose doing were so upright.

And when this image shattered of itself,
just like a bubble that has lost the water
beneath which it was formed, there then rose up

in my envisioning a girl who wept
most bitterly and said: "O queen, why did
you, in your wrath, desire to be no more?

So as to keep Lavinia, you killed
yourself; now you have lost me! I am she,
mother, who mourns your fall before another's."

Even as sleep is shattered when new light
strikes suddenly against closed eyes and, once
it's shattered, gleams before it dies completely,

so my imagination fell away
as soon as light--more powerful than light
we are accustomed to--beat on my eyes.

I looked about to see where I might be;
but when a voice said: "Here one can ascend,"
then I abandoned every other intent.

That voice made my will keen to see the one
who'd spoken--with the eagerness that cannot
be still until it faces what it wants.

But even as the sun, become too strong,
defeats our vision, veiling its own form,
so there my power of sight was overcome.

"This spirit is divine; and though unasked,
he would conduct us to the upward path;
he hides himself with that same light he sheds.

He does with us as men do with themselves;
for he who sees a need but waits to be
asked is already set on cruel refusal.

Now let our steps accept his invitation,
and let us try to climb before dark falls--
then, until day returns, we'll have to halt."

So said my guide; and toward a stairway, he
and I, together, turned; and just as soon
as I was at the first step, I sensed something

much like the motion of a wing, and wind
that beat against my face, and words: "Beati
pacifici, those free of evil anger!"

Above us now the final rays before;
the fall of night were raised to such a height
that we could see the stars on every side.

"O why, my strength, do you so melt away?"
I said within myself, because I felt
the force within my legs compelled to halt.

We'd reached a point at which the upward stairs
no longer climbed, and we were halted there
just like a ship when it has touched the shore.

I listened for a while, hoping to hear
whatever there might be in this new circle;
then I turned toward my master, asking him:

"Tell me, my gentle father: what offense
is purged within the circle we have reached?
Although our feet must stop, your words need not."

And he to me: "Precisely here, the love
of good that is too tepidly pursued
is mended; here the lazy oar plies harder.

But so that you may understand more clearly,
now turn your mind to me, and you will gather
some useful fruit from our delaying here.

My son, there's no Creator and no creature
who ever was without love--natural
or mental; and you know that," he began.

"The natural is always without error,
but mental love may choose an evil object
or err through too much or too little vigor.

As long as it's directed toward the First Good
and tends toward secondary goods with measure,
it cannot be the cause of evil pleasure;

but when it twists toward evil, or attends
to good with more or less care than it should,
those whom He made have worked against their Maker.

From this you see that--of necessity--
love is the seed in you of every virtue
and of all acts deserving punishment.

Now, since love never turns aside its eyes
from the well-being of its subject, things
are surely free from hatred of themselves;

and since no being can be seen as self-
existing and divorced from the First Being,
each creature is cut off from hating Him.

Thus, if I have distinguished properly,
ill love must mean to wish one's neighbor ill;
and this love's born in three ways in your clay.

There's he who, through abasement of another,
hopes for supremacy; he only longs
to see his neighbor's excellence cast down.

Then there is one who, when he is outdone,
fears his own loss of fame, power, honor, favor;
his sadness loves misfortune for his neighbor.

And there is he who, over injury
received, resentful, for revenge grows greedy
and, angrily, seeks out another's harm.

This threefold love is expiated here
below; now I would have you understand
the love that seeks the good distortedly.

Each apprehends confusedly a Good
in which the mind may rest, and longs for It;
and, thus, all strive to reach that Good; but if

the love that urges you to know It or
to reach that Good is lax, this terrace, after
a just repentance, punishes for that.

There is a different good, which does not make
men glad; it is not happiness, is not
true essence, fruit and root of every good.

The love that--profligately--yields to that
is wept on in three terraces above us;
but I'll not say what three shapes that loves takes--

may you seek those distinctions for yourself."

## 18

The subtle teacher had completed his
discourse to me; attentively he watched
my eyes to see if I seemed satisfied.

And I, still goaded by new thirst, was silent
without, although within I said: "Perhaps
I have displeased him with too many questions."

But that true father, who had recognized
the timid want I would not tell aloud,
by speaking, gave me courage to speak out.

At which I said: "Master, my sight is so
illumined by your light--I recognize
all that your words declare or analyze.

Therefore, I pray you, gentle father dear,
to teach me what love is: you have reduced
to love both each good and its opposite."

He said: "Direct your intellect's sharp eyes
toward me, and let the error of the blind
who'd serve as guides be evident to you.

The soul, which is created quick to love,
responds to everything that pleases, just
as soon as beauty wakens it to act.

Your apprehension draws an image from
a real object and expands upon
that object until soul has turned toward it;

and if, so turned, the soul tends steadfastly,
then that propensity is love--it's nature
that joins the soul in you, anew, through beauty.

Then, just as flames ascend because the form
of fire was fashioned to fly upward, toward
the stuff of its own sphere, where it lasts longest,

so does the soul, when seized, move into longing,
a motion of the spirit, never resting
till the beloved thing has made it joyous.

Now you can plainly see how deeply hidden
truth is from scrutinists who would insist
that every love is, in itself, praiseworthy;

and they are led to error by the matter
of love, because it may seem--always--good;
but not each seal is fine, although the wax is."

"Your speech and my own wit that followed it,"
I answered him, "have shown me what love is;
but that has filled me with still greater doubt;

for if love's offered to us from without
and is the only foot with which soul walks,
soul--going straight or crooked--has no merit."

And he to me: "What reason can see here,
I can impart; past that, for truth of faith,
it's Beatrice alone you must await.

Every substantial form, at once distinct
from matter and conjoined to it, ingathers
the force that is distinctively its own,

a force unknown to us until it acts--
it's never shown except in its effects,
just as green boughs display the life in plants.

And thus man does not know the source of his
intelligence of primal notions and
his tending toward desire's primal objects:

both are in you just as in bees there is
the honey--making urge; such primal will
deserves no praise, and it deserves no blame.

Now, that all other longings may conform
to this first will, there is in you, inborn,
the power that counsels, keeper of the threshold

of your assent: this is the principle
on which your merit may be judged, for it
garners and winnows good and evil longings.

Those reasoners who reached the roots of things
learned of this inborn freedom; the bequest
that, thus, they left unto the world is ethics.

Even if we allow necessity
as source for every love that flames in you,
the power to curb that love is still your own.

This noble power is what Beatrice
means by free will; therefore, remember it,
if she should ever speak of it to you."

The moon, with midnight now behind us, made
the stars seem scarcer to us; it was shaped
just like a copper basin, gleaming, new;

and countercourse, it crossed those paths the sun
ignites when those in Rome can see it set
between the Corsicans and the Sardinians.

That gracious shade for whom Pietola
won more renown than any Mantuan town,
had freed me from the weight of doubt I bore;

so that I, having harvested his clear
and open answers to my questions, stood
like one who, nearing sleep, has random visions.

But readiness for sleep was suddenly
taken from me by people who, behind
our backs, already turned in our direction.

Just as--of old--Ismenus and Asopus,
at night, along their banks, saw crowds and clamor
whenever Thebans had to summon Bacchus,

such was the arching crowd that curved around
that circle, driven on, as I made out,
by righteous will as well as by just love.

Soon all that mighty throng drew near us, for
they ran and ran; and two, in front of them,
who wept, were crying: "In her journey, Mary

made haste to reach the mountain, and, in order
to conquer Lerida, first Caesar thrust
against Marseilles, and then to Spain he rushed."

Following them, the others cried: "Quick, quick,
lest time be lost through insufficient love;
where urge for good is keen, grace finds new green."

"O people in whom eager fervor now
may compensate for sloth and negligence
you showed in doing good half--heartedly,

he--who's alive, and surely I don't lie
to you--would climb above as soon as he
has seen the sun shed light on us again;

then, tell us where the passage lies at hand."
My guide said this. One of the souls replied:
"Come, follow us, and you will find the gap.

We are so fully anxious to advance--
we cannot halt; and do forgive us, should
you take our penance for discourtesy.

I was St. Zeno's abbot in Verona
under the rule of valiant Barbarossa,
of whom Milan still speaks with so much sorrow.

And there is one with one foot in the grave,
who soon will weep over that monastery,
lamenting that he once had power there,

because, in place of its true shepherd, he
put one who was unsound of body and,
still more, of mind, and born in sin--his son.

I don't know if he said more or was silent--
he had already raced so far beyond us;
but I heard this much and was pleased to hear it.

And he who was my help in every need
said: "Turn around: see those two coming--they
whose words mock sloth." And I heard those two say

behind all of the rest: "The ones for whom
the sea parted were dead before the Jordan
saw those who had inherited its lands;

and those who did not suffer trials until
the end together with Anchises' son
gave themselves up to life without renown."

Then, when those shades were so far off from us
that seeing them became impossible,
a new thought rose inside of me and, from

that thought, still others--many and diverse--
were born: I was so drawn from random thought
to thought that, wandering in mind, I shut

my eyes, transforming thought on thought to dream.


## 19

In that hour when the heat of day, defeated
by Earth and, sometimes, Saturn, can no longer
warm up the moon--sent cold, when geomancers

can, in the east, see their Fortuna major
rising before the dawn along a path
that will be darkened for it only briefly--

a stammering woman came to me in dream:
her eyes askew, and crooked on her feet,
her hands were crippled, her complexion sallow.

I looked at her; and just as sun revives
cold limbs that night made numb, so did my gaze
loosen her tongue and then, in little time,

set her contorted limbs in perfect order;
and, with the coloring that love prefers,
my eyes transformed the wanness of her features.

And when her speech had been set free, then she
began to sing so, that it would have been
most difficult for me to turn aside.

"I am," she sang, "I am the pleasing siren,
who in midsea leads mariners astray--
there is so much delight in hearing me.

I turned aside Ulysses, although he
had longed to journey; who grows used to me
seldom departs--I satisfy him so."

Her lips were not yet done when, there beside me,
a woman showed herself, alert and saintly,
to cast the siren into much confusion.

"O Virgil, Virgil, tell me: who is this?"
she asked most scornfully; and he came forward,
his eyes intent upon that honest one.

He seized the other, baring her in front,
tearing her clothes, and showing me her belly;
the stench that came from there awakened me.

I moved my eyes, and my good master cried:
"At least three times I've called you. Rise and come:
let's find the opening where you may enter."

I rose; the daylight had already filled
the circles of the sacred mountain--we
were journeying with new sun at our back.

I followed him, bearing my brow like one
whose thoughts have weighed him down, who bends as if
he were the semiarch that forms a bridge,

and then I heard: "Draw near; the pass is here,"
said in a manner so benign and gentle
as, in our mortal land, one cannot hear.

He who addressed us so had open wings,
white as a swan's; and he directed us
upward, between two walls of the hard rock.

And then he moved his plumes and, fanning us,
affirmed that those "Qui lugent" would be blessed--
their souls would be possessed of consolation.

"What makes you keep your eyes upon the ground?"
my guide began to say to me when both
of us had climbed a little, past the angel.

And I: "What makes me move with such misgiving
is a new vision: it has so beguiled me
that I cannot relinquish thoughts of it."

"The one you saw," he said, "that ancient witch--
for her alone one must atone above;
you saw how man can free himself from her.

Let that suffice, and hurry on your way;
fasten your eyes upon the lure that's spun
by the eternal King with His great spheres."

Just like a falcon, who at first looks down,
then, when the falconer has called, bends forward,
craving the food that's ready for him there,

so l became--and so remained until,
through the cleft rock that lets one climb above,
I reached the point at which the circle starts.

When I was in the clearing, the fifth level,
my eyes discovered people there who wept,
lying upon the ground, all turned face down.

"Adhaesit pavimento anima mea,"
I heard them say with sighs so deep that it
was hard to comprehend the words they spoke.

"O God's elect, whose sufferings both hope
and justice make less difficult, direct
us to the stairway meant for our ascent."

"If you come here but do not need to be
prostrate, and you would find the path most quickly,
then keep your right hand always to the outside."

So did the poet ask, so did reply
come from a little way ahead; and I,
hearing that voice reply, learned what was hidden.

I turned my eyes to find my master's eyes;
at this, with a glad sign, he ratified
what I had asked for with my eager eyes.

When, free to do as I had wanted to,
I moved ahead and bent over that soul
whose words--before--had made me notice him,

saying: "Spirit, within whom weeping ripens
that without which there's no return to God,
suspend awhile--for me--your greater care.

Tell me: Who were you? And why are your backs
turned up? And there--where I, alive, set out--
would you have me beseech some good for you?"

And he to me: "Why Heaven turns our backs
against itself, you are to know; but first
scias quod ego fui successor Petri.

Between Sestri and Chiavari descends
a handsome river; and its name is set
upon the upper portion of my crest.

For one month and a little more I learned
how the great mantle weighs on him who'd keep it
out of the mire--all other weights seem feathers.

Alas, how tardy my conversion was!
But when I had been named the Roman shepherd,
then I discovered the deceit of life.

I saw that there the heart was not at rest,
nor could I, in that life, ascend more high;
so that, in me, love for this life was kindled.

Until that point I was a squalid soul,
from God divided, wholly avaricious;
now, as you see, I'm punished here for that.

What avarice enacts is here declared
in the purgation of converted souls;
the mountain has no punishment more bitter.

Just as we did not lift our eyes on high
but set our sight on earthly things instead,
so justice here impels our eyes toward earth.

As avarice annulled in us the love
of any other good, and thus we lost
our chance for righteous works, so justice here

fetters our hands and feet and holds us captive;
and for as long as it may please our just
Lord, here we'll be outstretched and motionless."

I'd kneeled, wishing to speak: but just as I
began--and through my voice alone--he sensed
that I had meant to do him reverence.

"What reason makes you bend your body so?"
he said. And I to him: "Your dignity
made conscience sting me as I stood erect."

"Brother, straighten your legs; rise up!" he answered.
"Don't be mistaken; I, with you and others,
am but a fellow--servant of one Power.

If you have ever understood the holy
sound of the Gospel that says ‘Neque nubent,'
then you will see why I have spoken so.

Now go your way: I'd not have you stop longer;
your staying here disturbs my lamentations,
the tears that help me ripen what you mentioned.

Beyond, I have a niece whose name's Alagia;
she in herself is good, as long as our
house, by example, brings her not to evil;

and she alone is left to me beyond."


## 20

Against a better will, the will fights weakly;
therefore, to please him, though against my pleasure,
I drew my unquenched sponge out of the water.

I moved on, and my guide moved through the un--
encumbered space, hugging the rock, as one
walks on a wall, close to the battlements;

for those whose eyes would melt down, drop by drop,
the evil that possesses all the world,
were too close to the edge, on the far side.

May you be damned, o ancient wolf, whose power
can claim more prey than all the other beasts--
your hungering is deep and never--ending!

O heavens, through whose revolutions many
think things on earth are changed, when will he come--
the one whose works will drive that wolf away?

Our steps were short and slow as we moved on;
I was attentive to the shades; I heard
the sorrow in their tears and lamentations.

Then I, by chance, heard one ahead of us
crying in his lament, "Sweet Mary," as
a woman would outcry in labor pains.

And he continued: "In that hostel where
you had set down your holy burden, there
one can discover just how poor you were."

Following this I heard: "O good Fabricius,
you chose, as your possessions, indigence
with virtue rather than much wealth with vice."

These words had been so pleasing to me--I
moved forward, so that I might come to know
the spirit from whom they had seemed to come.

He kept on speaking, telling the largesse
of Nicholas--the gifts he gave the maidens
so that they might be honorably wed.

"O soul who speaks of so much righteousness,
do tell me who you were," I said, "and why
just you alone renew these seemly praises.

Your speaking to me will not go unthanked
when I return to finish the short span
of that life which now hurries toward its end."

And he: "I'll tell you--not because I hope
for solace from your world, but for such grace
as shines in you before your death's arrived.

I was the root of the obnoxious plant
that overshadows all the Christian lands,
so that fine fruit can rarely rise from them.

But if Douai and Lille and Bruges and Ghent
had power, they would soon take vengeance on it;
and this I beg of Him who judges all.

The name I bore beyond was Hugh Capet:
of me were born the Louises and Philips
by whom France has been ruled most recently.

I was the son of a Parisian butcher.
When all the line of ancient kings was done
and only one--a monk in gray--survived,

I found the reins that ruled the kingdom tight
within my hands, and I held so much new--
gained power and possessed so many friends

that, to the widowed crown, my own son's head
was elevated, and from him began
the consecrated bones of all those kings.

Until the giant dowry of Provence
removed all sense of shame within my house,
my line was not worth much, but did no wrong.

There its rapine began with lies and force;
and then it seized--that it might make amends--
Ponthieu and Normandy and Gascony.

Charles came to Italy and, for amends,
made Conradin a victim, and then thrust
back Thomas into Heaven, for amends.

I see a time--not too far off--in which
another Charles advances out of France
to make himself and his descendants famous.

He does not carry weapons when he comes,
only the lance that Judas tilted; this
he couches so--he twists the paunch of Florence.

From this he'll gain not land, just shame and sin,
which will be all the heavier for him
as he would reckon lightly such disgrace.

The other, who once left his ship as prisoner--
I see him sell his daughter, bargaining
as pirates haggle over female slaves.

O avarice, my house is now your captive:
it traffics in the flesh of its own children--
what more is left for you to do to us?

That past and future evil may seem less,
I see the fleur--de--lis enter Anagni
and, in His vicar, Christ made prisoner.

I see Him mocked a second time; I see
the vinegar and gall renewed--and He
is slain between two thieves who're still alive.

And I see the new Pilate, one so cruel
that, still not sated, he, without decree,
carries his greedy sails into the Temple.

O You, my Lord, when will You let me be
happy on seeing vengeance that, concealed,
makes sweet Your anger in Your secrecy?

What I have said about the only bride
the Holy Ghost has known, the words that made
you turn to me for commentary--these

words serve as answer to our prayers as long
as it is day; but when night falls, then we
recite examples that are contrary.

Then we tell over how Pygmalion,
out of his greedy lust for gold, became
a thief and traitor and a parricide;

the wretchedness of avaricious Midas,
resulting from his ravenous request,
the consequence that always makes men laugh;

and each of us recalls the foolish Achan--
how he had robbed the spoils, so that the anger
of Joshua still seems to sting him here.

Then we accuse Sapphira and her husband;
we praise the kicks Heliodorus suffered;
and Polymnestor, who killed Polydorus,

resounds, in infamy, round all this mountain;
and finally, what we cry here is: Crassus,
tell us, because you know: "How does gold taste?"‘

At times one speaks aloud, another low,
according to the sentiment that goads
us now to be more swift and now more slow:

thus, I was not alone in speaking of
the good we cite by day, but here nearby
no other spirit raised his voice as high."

We had already taken leave of him
and were already struggling to advance
along that road as far as we were able,

when I could feel the mountain tremble like
a falling thing; at which a chill seized me
as cold grips one who goes to meet his death.

Delos had surely not been buffeted
so hard before Latona planted there
the nest in which to bear the sky's two eyes.

Then such a shout rose up on every side
that, drawing near to me, my master said:
"Don't be afraid, as long as I'm your guide."

"Gloria in excelsis Deo," they all cried--
so did I understand from those nearby,
whose shouted words were able to be heard.

Just like the shepherds who first heard that song,
we stood, but did not move, in expectation,
until the trembling stopped, the song was done.

Then we took up again our holy path,
watching the shades who lay along the ground,
who had resumed their customary tears.

My ignorance has never struggled so,
has never made me long so much to know--
if memory does not mislead me now--

as it seemed then to long within my thoughts;
nor did I dare to ask--we were so rushed;
nor, by myself, could I discern the cause.

So, timid, pensive, I pursued my way.

## 21

The natural thirst that never can be quenched
except by water that gives grace--the draught
the simple woman of Samaria sought--

tormented me; haste spurred me on the path
crowded with souls, behind my guide; and I
felt pity, though their pain was justified.

And here--even as Luke records for us
that Christ, new--risen from his burial cave,
appeared to two along his way--a shade

appeared; and he advanced behind our backs
while we were careful not to trample on
the outstretched crowd. We did not notice him

until he had addressed us with: "God give
you, o my brothers, peace!" We turned at once;
then, after offering suitable response,

Virgil began: "And may that just tribunal
which has consigned me to eternal exile
place you in peace within the blessed assembly!"

"What!" he exclaimed, as we moved forward quickly.
"If God's not deemed you worthy of ascent,
who's guided you so far along His stairs?"

"If you observe the signs the angel traced
upon this man," my teacher said, "you'll see
plainly--he's meant to reign with all the righteous;

but since she who spins night and day had not
yet spun the spool that Clotho sets upon
the distaff and adjusts for everyone,

his soul, the sister of your soul and mine,
in its ascent, could not--alone--have climbed
here, for it does not see the way we see.

Therefore, I was brought forth from Hell's broad jaws
to guide him in his going; I shall lead
him just as far as where I teach can reach.

But tell me, if you can, why, just before,
the mountain shook and shouted, all of it--
for so it seemed--down to its sea--bathed shore."

His question threaded so the needle's eye
of my desire that just the hope alone
of knowing left my thirst more satisfied.

That other shade began: "The sanctity
of these slopes does not suffer anything
that's without order or uncustomary.

This place is free from every perturbation:
what heaven from itself and in itself
receives may serve as cause here--no thing else.

Therefore, no rain, no hail, no snow, no dew,
no hoarfrost falls here any higher than
the stairs of entry with their three brief steps;

neither thick clouds nor thin appear, nor flash
of lightning; Thaumas' daughter, who so often
shifts places in your world, is absent here.

Dry vapor cannot climb up any higher
than to the top of the three steps of which
I spoke--where Peter's vicar plants his feet.

Below that point, there may be small or ample
tremors; but here above, I know not why,
no wind concealed in earth has ever caused

a tremor; for it only trembles here
when some soul feels it's cleansed, so that it rises
or stirs to climb on high; and that shout follows.

The will alone is proof of purity
and, fully free, surprises soul into
a change of dwelling place--effectively.

Soul had the will to climb before, but that
will was opposed by longing to do penance
(as once, to sin), instilled by divine justice.

And I, who have lain in this suffering
five hundred years and more, just now have felt
my free will for a better threshold: thus,

you heard the earthquake and the pious spirits
throughout the mountain as they praised the Lord--
and may He send them speedily upward."

So did he speak to us; and just as joy
is greater when we quench a greater thirst,
the joy he brought cannot be told in words.

And my wise guide: "I now can see the net
impeding you, how one slips through, and why
it quakes here, and what makes you all rejoice.

And now may it please you to tell me who
you were, and in your words may I find why
you've lain here for so many centuries."

"In that age when the worthy Titus, with
help from the Highest King, avenged the wounds
from which the blood that Judas sold had flowed,

I had sufficient fame beyond," that spirit
replied; "I bore the name that lasts the longest
and honors most--but faith was not yet mine.

So gentle was the spirit of my verse
that Rome drew me, son of Toulouse, to her,
and there my brow deserved a crown of myrtle.

On earth my name is still remembered--Statius:
I sang of Thebes and then of great Achilles;
I fell along the way of that last labor.

The sparks that warmed me, the seeds of my ardor,
were from the holy fire--the same that gave
more than a thousand poets light and flame.

I speak of the Aeneid; when I wrote
verse, it was mother to me, it was nurse;
my work, without it, would not weigh an ounce.

And to have lived on earth when Virgil lived--
for that I would extend by one more year
the time I owe before my exile's end."

These words made Virgil turn to me, and as
he turned, his face, through silence, said: "Be still"
(and yet the power of will cannot do all,

for tears and smiles are both so faithful to
the feelings that have prompted them that true
feeling escapes the will that would subdue).

But I smiled like a man whose eyes would signal;
at this, the shade was silent, and he stared
where sentiment is clearest--at my eyes--

and said: "So may your trying labor end
successfully, do tell me why--just now--
your face showed me the flashing of a smile."

Now I am held by one side and the other:
one keeps me still, the other conjures me
to speak; but when, therefore, I sigh, my master

knows why and tells me: "Do not be afraid
to speak, but speak and answer what he has
asked you to tell him with such earnestness."

At this, I answered: "Ancient spirit, you
perhaps are wondering at the smile I smiled:
but I would have you feel still more surprise.

He who is guide, who leads my eyes on high,
is that same Virgil from whom you derived
the power to sing of men and of the gods.

Do not suppose my smile had any source
beyond the speech you spoke; be sure--it was
those words you said of him that were the cause."

Now he had bent to kiss my teacher's feet,
but Virgil told him: "Brother, there's no need--
you are a shade, a shade is what you see."

And, rising, he: "Now you can understand
how much love burns in me for you, when I
forget our insubstantiality,

treating the shades as one treats solid things."

## 22

The angel now was left behind us, he
who had directed us to the sixth terrace,
having erased one P that scarred my face;

he had declared that those who longed for justice
are blessed, and his voice concluded that
message with "sitiunt," without the rest.

And while I climbed behind the two swift spirits,
not laboring at all, for I was lighter
than I had been along the other stairs,

Virgil began: "Love that is kindled by
virtue, will, in another, find reply,
as long as that love's flame appears without;

so, from the time when Juvenal, descending
among us, in Hell's Limbo, had made plain
the fondness that you felt for me, my own

benevolence toward you has been much richer
than any ever given to a person
one has not seen; thus, now these stairs seem short.

But tell me (and, as friend, forgive me if
excessive candor lets my reins relax,
and, as a friend, exchange your words with me):

how was it that you found within your breast
a place for avarice, when you possessed
the wisdom you had nurtured with such care?"

These words at first brought something of a smile
to Statius; then he answered: "Every word
you speak, to me is a dear sign of love.

Indeed, because true causes are concealed,
we often face deceptive reasoning
and things provoke perplexity in us.

Your question makes me sure that you're convinced--
perhaps because my circle was the fifth--
that, in the life I once lived, avarice

had been my sin. Know then that I was far
from avarice--it was my lack of measure
thousands of months have punished. And if I

had not corrected my assessment by
my understanding what your verses meant
when you, as if enraged by human nature,

exclaimed: ‘Why cannot you, o holy hunger
for gold, restrain the appetite of mortals?'--
I'd now, while rolling weights, know sorry jousts.

Then I became aware that hands might open
too wide, like wings, in spending; and of this,
as of my other sins, I did repent.

How many are to rise again with heads
cropped close, whom ignorance prevents from reaching
repentance in--and at the end of--life!

And know that when a sin is countered by
another fault--directly opposite
to it--then, here, both sins see their green wither.

Thus, I join those who pay for avarice
in my purgation, though what brought me here
was prodigality--its opposite."

"Now, when you sang the savage wars of those
twin sorrows of Jocasta," said the singer
of the bucolic poems, "it does not seem--

from those notes struck by you and Clio there--
that you had yet turned faithful to the faith
without which righteous works do not suffice.

If that is so, then what sun or what candles
drew you from darkness so that, in their wake,
you set your sails behind the fisherman?"

And he to him: "You were the first to send me
to drink within Parnassus' caves and you,
the first who, after God, enlightened me.

You did as he who goes by night and carries
the lamp behind him--he is of no help
to his own self but teaches those who follow--

when you declared: ‘The ages are renewed;
justice and man's first time on earth return;
from Heaven a new progeny descends.'

Through you I was a poet and, through you,
a Christian; but that you may see more plainly,
I'll set my hand to color what I sketch.

Disseminated by the messengers
of the eternal kingdom, the true faith
by then had penetrated all the world,

and the new preachers preached in such accord
with what you'd said (and I have just repeated),
that I was drawn into frequenting them.

Then they appeared to me to be so saintly
that, when Domitian persecuted them,
my own laments accompanied their grief;

and while I could--as long as I had life--
I helped them, and their honest practices
made me disdainful of all other sects.

Before--within my poem--I'd led the Greeks
unto the streams of Thebes, I was baptized;
but out of fear, I was a secret Christian

and, for a long time, showed myself as pagan;
for this halfheartedness, for more than
four centuries, I circled the fourth circle.

And now may you, who lifted up the lid
that hid from me the good of which I speak,
while time is left us as we climb, tell me

where is our ancient Terence, and Caecilius
and Plautus, where is Varius, if you know;
tell me if they are damned, and in what quarter."

"All these and Persius, I, and many others,"
my guide replied, "are with that Greek to whom
the Muses gave their gifts in greatest measure.

Our place is the blind prison, its first circle;
and there we often talk about the mountain
where those who were our nurses always dwell.

Euripides is with us, Antiphon,
Simonides, and Agathon, as well
as many other Greeks who once wore laurel

upon their brow; and there--of your own people--
one sees Antigone, Deiphyle,
Ismene, sad still, Argia as she was.

There one can see the woman who showed Langia,
and there, Tiresias' daughter; there is Thetis;
and, with her sisters, there, Deidamia."

Both poets now were silent, once again
intent on their surroundings-- they were free
of stairs and walls; with day's first four handmaidens

already left behind, and with the fifth
guiding the chariot-pole and lifting it,
so that its horn of flame rose always higher,

my master said: "I think it's time that we
turn our right shoulders toward the terrace edge,
circling the mountain in the way we're used to."

In this way habit served us as a banner;
and when we chose that path, our fear was less
because that worthy soul gave his assent.

Those two were in the lead; I walked alone,
behind them, listening to their colloquy,
which taught me much concerning poetry.

But their delightful conversation soon
was interrupted by a tree that blocked
our path; its fruits were fine, their scent was sweet,

and even as a fir-tree tapers upward
from branch to branch, that tree there tapered downward,
so as--I think-- to ward off any climber.

Upon our left, where wall enclosed our path,
bright running water fell from the high rock
and spread itself upon the leaves above.

When the two poets had approached the tree,
a voice emerging from within the leaves
cried out: "This food shall be denied to you."

Then it cried: "Mary's care was for the marriage-
feast's being seemly and complete, not for
her mouth (which now would intercede for you).

And when they drank, of old, the Roman women
were satisfied with water; and young Daniel,
through his disdain of food, acquired wisdom.

The first age was as fair as gold: when hungry,
men found the taste of acorns good; when thirsty,
they found that every little stream was nectar.

When he was in the wilderness, the Baptist
had fed on nothing more than honey, locusts:
for this he was made great, as glorious

as, in the Gospel, is made plain to you."

## 23

While I was peering so intently through
the green boughs, like a hunter who, so used,
would waste his life in chasing after birds,

my more than father said to me: "Now come,
son, for the time our journey can permit
is to be used more fruitfully than this."

I turned my eyes, and I was no less quick
to turn my steps; I followed those two sages,
whose talk was such, my going brought no loss.

And--there!--"Labia mea, Domine"
was wept and sung and heard in such a manner
that it gave birth to both delight and sorrow.

"O gentle father, what is this I hear?"
I asked. And he: "Perhaps they're shades who go
loosening the knot of what they owe."

Even as pensive pilgrims do, who when
they've overtaken folk unknown to them
along the way, will turn but will not stop,

so, overtaking us--they had come from
behind but were more swift--a crowd of souls,
devout and silent, looked at us in wonder.

Each shade had dark and hollow eyes; their faces
were pale and so emaciated that
their taut skin took its shape from bones beneath.

I don't believe that even Erysichthon
had been so dried, down to his very hide,
by hunger, when his fast made him fear most.

Thinking, I told myself: "I see the people
who lost Jerusalem, when Mary plunged
her beak into her son." The orbits of

their eyes seemed like a ring that's lost its gems;
and he who, in the face of man, would read
OMO would here have recognized the M.

Who--if he knew not how--would have believed
that longing born from odor of a tree,
odor of water, could reduce souls so?

I was already wondering what had
so famished them (for I had not yet learned
the reason for their leanness and sad scurf),

when--there!--a shade, his eyes deep in his head,
turned toward me, staring steadily; and then
he cried aloud: "What grace is granted me!"

I never would have recognized him by
his face; and yet his voice made plain to me
what his appearance had obliterated.

This spark rekindled in me everything
I knew about those altered features; thus,
I realized it was Forese's face.

"Ah, don't reproach me for the dried--out scabs
that stain my skin," he begged, "nor for the lack
of flesh on me; but do tell me the truth

about yourself, do tell me who those two
souls there are, those who are escorting you;
may you not keep yourself from speaking to me!"

"Your face, which I once wept on when you died,"
I answered him, "now gives me no less cause
for sad lament, seeing you so deformed

But tell me, for God's sake, what has unleaved
you so; don't make me speak while I'm amazed--
he who's distracted answers clumsily."

And he to me: "From the eternal counsel,
the water and the tree you left behind
receive the power that makes me waste away.

All of these souls who, grieving, sing because
their appetite was gluttonous, in thirst
and hunger here resanctify themselves.

The fragrance of the fruit and of the water
that's sprayed through that green tree kindles in us
craving for food and drink; and not once only,

as we go round this space, our pain's renewed--
I speak of pain but I should speak of solace,
for we are guided to those trees by that

same longing that had guided Christ when He
had come to free us through the blood He shed
and, in His joyousness, called out: ‘Eli.'"

And I to him: "Forese, from that day
when you exchanged the world for better life
until now, less than five years have revolved;

and if you waited for the moment when
the power to sin was gone before you found
the hour of the good grief that succors us

and weds us once again to God, how have
you come so quickly here? I thought to find
you down below, where time must pay for time."

And he to me: "It is my Nella who,
with her abundant tears, has guided me
to drink the sweet wormwood of torments: she,

with sighs and prayers devout has set me free
of that slope where one waits and has freed me
from circles underneath this circle. She--

my gentle widow, whom I loved most dearly--
was all the more beloved and prized by God
as she is more alone in her good works.

For even the Barbagia of Sardinia
is far more modest in its women than
is that Barbagia where I left her. O

sweet brother, what would you have had me say?
A future time's already visible
to me-a time not too far--off from now--

when, from the pulpit, it shall be forbidden
to those immodest ones--Florentine women--
to go displaying bosoms with bare paps.

What ordinances--spiritual, civil--
were ever needed by barbarian or
Saracen women to make them go covered?

But if those shameless ones had certain knowledge
of what swift Heaven's readying for them,
then they would have mouths open now to howl;

for if our foresight here does not deceive me,
they will be sad before the cheeks of those
whom lullabies can now appease grow beards.

Ah, brother, do not hide things any longer!
You see that I am not alone, for all
these people stare at where you veil the sun."

At this I said to him: "If you should call
to mind what you have been with me and I
with you, remembering now will still be heavy.

He who precedes me turned me from that life
some days ago, when she who is the sister
of him"--I pointed to the sun--"was showing

her roundness to you. It is he who's led
me through the deep night of the truly dead
with this true flesh that follows after him.

His help has drawn me up from there, climbing
and circling round this mountain, which makes straight
you whom the world made crooked. And he says

that he will bear me company until
I reach the place where Beatrice is; there
I must remain without him. It is Virgil

who speaks to me in this way," and I pointed
to him; "this other is the shade for whom,
just now, your kingdom caused its every slope

to tremble as it freed him from itself."

## 24

Our talking did not slow our pace, our pace
not slow our talking; but conversing, we
moved quickly, like a boat a fair wind drives.

And recognizing that I was alive,
the shades--they seemed to be things twice dead--drew
amazement from the hollows of their eyes.

And I, continuing my telling, added:
"Perhaps he is more slow in his ascent
than he would be had he not met the other.

But tell me, if you can: where is Piccarda?
And tell me if, among those staring at me,
I can see any person I should note."

"My sister--and I know not whether she
was greater in her goodness or her beauty--
on high Olympus is in triumph; she

rejoices in her crown already," he
began, then added: "It is not forbidden
to name each shade here--abstinence has eaten

away our faces." And he pointed: "This
is Bonagiunta, Bonagiunta da
Lucca; the one beyond him, even more

emaciated than the rest, had clasped
the Holy Church; he was from Tours; his fast
purges Bolsena's eels, Vernaccia's wine."

And he named many others, one by one,
and, at their naming, they all seemed content;
so that--for this--no face was overcast.

I saw-their teeth were biting emptiness--
both Ubaldin da la Pila and Boniface,
who shepherded so many with his staff.

I saw Messer Marchese, who once had
more ease, less dryness, drinking at Forli
and yet could never satisfy his thirst.

But just as he who looks and then esteems
one more than others, so did I prize him
of Lucca, for he seemed to know me better.

He murmured; something like "Gentucca" was
what I heard from the place where he could feel
the wound of justice that denudes them so.

"O soul," I said, "who seems so eager to
converse with me, do speak so that I hear you,
for speech may satisfy both you and me."

He answered: "Although men condemn my city,
there is a woman born--she wears no veil
as yet-because of whom you'll find it pleasing.

You are to journey with this prophecy;
and if there's something in my murmuring
you doubt, events themselves will bear me out.

But tell me if the man whom I see here
is he who brought the new rhymes forth, beginning:
‘Ladies who have intelligence of love.'"

I answered: "I am one who, when Love breathes
in me, takes note; what he, within, dictates,
I, in that way, without, would speak and shape."

"O brother, now I see," he said, "the knot
that kept the Notary, Guittone, and me
short of the sweet new manner that I hear.

I clearly see how your pens follow closely
behind him who dictates, and certainly
that did not happen with our pens; and he

who sets himself to ferreting profoundly
can find no other difference between
the two styles." He fell still, contentedly.

Even as birds that winter on the Nile
at times will slow and form a flock in air,
then speed their flight and form a file, so all

the people who were mere moved much more swiftly,
turning away their faces, hurrying
their pace because of leanness and desire.

And just as he who's tired of running lets
his comrades go ahead and slows his steps
until he's eased the panting of his chest,

so did Forese let the holy flock
pass by and move, behind, with me, saying:
"How long before I shall see you again?"

"I do not know," I said, "how long I'll live;
and yet, however quick is my return,
my longing for these shores would have me here

sooner--because the place where I was set
to live is day by day deprived of good
and seems along the way to wretched ruin."

"Do not be vexed," he said, "for I can see
the guiltiest of all dragged by a beast's
tail to the valley where no sin is purged.

At every step the beast moves faster, always
gaining momentum, till it smashes him
and leaves his body squalidly undone.

Those wheels," and here he looked up at the sky,
"do not have long to turn before you see
plainly what I can't tell more openly.

Now you remain behind, for time is costly
here in this kingdom; I should lose too much
by moving with you thus, at equal pace."

Just as a horseman sometimes gallops out,
leaving behind his troop of riders, so
that he may gain the honor of the first

clash--so, with longer strides, did he leave us;
and I remained along my path with those
two who were such great marshals of the world.

And when he'd gone so far ahead of us
that my eyes strained to follow him, just as
my mind was straining after what he'd said,

the branches of another tree, heavy
with fruit, alive with green, appeared to me
nearby, just past a curve where I had turned.

Beneath the tree I saw shades lifting hands,
crying I know not what up toward the branches,
like little eager, empty--headed children,

who beg--but he of whom they beg does not
reply, but to provoke their longing, he
holds high, and does not hide, the thing they want.

Then they departed as if disabused;
and we--immediately--reached that great tree,
which turns aside so many prayers and tears.

"Continue on, but don't draw close to it;
there is a tree above from which Eve ate,
and from that tree above, this plant was raised."

Among the boughs, a voice--I know not whose--
spoke so; thus, drawing closer, Virgil, Statius,
and I edged on, along the side that rises.

It said: "Remember those with double chests,
the miserable ones, born of the clouds,
whom Theseus battled when they'd gorged themselves;

and those whom Gideon refused as comrades--
those Hebrews who had drunk too avidly--
when he came down the hills to Midian."

So, keeping close to one of that road's margins,
we moved ahead, hearing of gluttony--
its sins repaid by sorry penalties.

Then, with more space along the lonely path,
a thousand steps and more had brought us forward,
each of us meditating wordlessly.

"What are you thinking of, you three who walk
alone?" a sudden voice called out; at which
I started--like a scared young animal.

I raised my head to see who it might be;
no glass or metal ever seen within
a furnace was so glowing or so red

as one I saw, who said: "If you'd ascend,
then you must turn at this point; for whoever
would journey unto peace must pass this way."

But his appearance had deprived me of
my sight, so that--as one who uses hearing
as guide--I turned and followed my two teachers.

And like the breeze of May that-heralding
the dawning of the day--when it is steeped
in flowers and in grass, stirs fragrantly,

so did I feel the wind that blew against
the center of my brow, and clearly sensed
the movement of his wings, the air's ambrosia.

And then I heard: "Blessed are those whom grace
illumines so, that, in their breasts, the love
of taste does not awake too much desire--

whose hungering is always in just measure."

## 25

The hour when climbers cannot pause had come:
the sun had left to Taurus the meridian,
and night had left it to the Scorpion.

Therefore, like one who will not stop but moves
along his path, no matter what he sees,
if he is goaded by necessity,

we made our way into the narrow gap
and, one behind the other, took the stairs
so strait that climbers there must separate.

And as the fledgling stork will lift its wing
because it wants to fly, but dares not try
to leave the nest, and lets its wing drop back,

so I, with my desire to question kindled
then spent, arrived as far as making ready
to speak. But my dear father, though our steps

were hurrying, did not stop talking, for
he said: "The iron of the arrow's touched
the longbow; let the shaft of speech fly off."

Then I had confidence enough to open
my mouth and ask him: "How can one grow lean
where there is never need for nourishment?"

"If you recall how Meleager was
consumed," he said, "just when the firebrand
was spent, this won't be hard to understand;

and if you think how, though your body's swift,
your image in the mirror captures it,
then what perplexed will seem to you transparent.

But that your will to know may be appeased,
here's Statius, and I call on him and ask
that he now be the healer of your doubts."

"If I explain eternal ways to him,"
Statius replied, "while you are present here,
let my excuse be: I cannot refuse you."

Then he began: "If, son, your mind receives
and keeps my words, then what I say will serve
as light upon the how that you have asked.

The thirsty veins drink up the perfect blood--
but not all of that blood: a portion's left,
like leavings that are taken from the table.

Within the heart, that part acquires power
to form all of another's human limbs,
as blood that flows through veins feeds one's own limbs.

Digested yet again, that part descends
to what is best not named; from there it drips
into the natural receptacle,

upon another's blood; the two bloods mix,
one ready to be passive and one active
because a perfect place, the heart, prepared them.

The active, having reached the passive, starts
to work: first it coagulates--and then
quickens-the matter it has made more dense.

Having become a soul (much like a plant,
though with this difference--a plant's complete,
whereas a fetus still is journeying),

the active virtue labors, so the fetus
may move and feel, like a sea-sponge; and then
it starts to organize the powers it's seeded.

At this point, son, the power that had come
from the begetter's heart unfolds and spreads,
that nature may see every limb perfected.

But how the animal becomes a speaking
being, you've not yet seen; this point's so hard,
it led one wiser than you are to err

in separating from the possible
intellect the soul, since he could see
no organ for the mind--so did he teach.

Open your heart to truth we now have reached
and know that, once the brain's articulation
within the fetus has attained perfection,

then the First Mover turns toward it with joy
on seeing so much art in nature and
breathes into it new spirit--vigorous--

which draws all that is active in the fetus
into its substance and becomes one soul
that lives and feels and has self-consciousness.

That what I say may leave you less perplexed,
consider the sun's heat that, when combined
with sap that flows from vines, is then made wine.

And when Lachesis lacks more thread, then soul's
divided from the flesh; potentially,
it bears with it the human and divine;

but with the human powers mute, the rest--
intelligence and memory and will--
are more acute in action than they were.

With no delay, the soul falls of itself--
astonishingly--on one of two shores;
there it learns--early--what way it will journey.

There, once the soul is circumscribed by space,
the power that gives form irradiates
as-and as much as--once it formed live limbs.

And even as the saturated air,
since it reflects the rays the sun has sent,
takes rainbow colors as its ornament,

so there, where the soul stopped, the nearby air
takes on the form that soul impressed on it,
a shape that is, potentially, real body;

and then, just as a flame will follow after
the fire whenever fire moves, so that
new form becomes the spirit's follower.

Since from that airy body it takes on
its semblance, that soul is called ‘shade': that shape
forms organs for each sense, even for sight.

This airy body lets us speak and laugh;
with it we form the tears and sigh the sighs
that you, perhaps, have heard around this mountain.

Just as we are held fast by longings and
by other sentiments, our shade takes form:
this is the cause of your astonishment."

By now we'd reached the final turning we
would meet and took the pathway right, at which
we were preoccupied with other cares.

There, from the wall, the mountain hurls its flames;
but, from the terrace side, there whirls a wind
that pushes back the fire and limits it;

thus, on the open side, proceeding one
by one, we went; I feared the fire on
the left and, on the right, the precipice.

My guide said: "On this terrace, it is best
to curb your eyes: the least distraction--left
or right--can mean a step you will regret."

Then, from the heart of that great conflagration,
I heard "Summae Deus clementiae"
sung--and was not less keen to turn my eyes;

and I saw spirits walking in the flames,
so that I looked at them and at my steps,
sharing the time I had to look at each.

After they'd reached that hymn's end, "Virum non
cognosco" were the words they cried aloud;
then they began the hymn in a low voice

again, and, done again, they cried: "Diana
kept to the woods and banished Helice
after she'd felt the force of Venus' poison."

Then they returned to singing; and they praised
aloud those wives and husbands who were chaste,
as virtue and as matrimony mandate.

This is--I think--the way these spirits act
as long as they are burned by fire: this is
the care and this the nourishment with which

one has to heal the final wound of all.

## 26

While we moved at the edge, one first, one after,
and I could often hear my gentle master
saying: "Take care--and do not waste my warning,"

the sun, its rays already altering
the coloring of all the west from azure
to white, was striking me on my right shoulder.

And where my shadow fell, it made the flames
seem more inflamed; and I saw many shades
walking, intent upon a sight so strange.

This was the reason that first prompted them
to speak to me. Among themselves they said:
"He does not seem to have a fictive body."

Then certain of them came as close to me
as they were able to while, cautiously,
they never left the boundaries of their burning.

"O you who move behind the others not
because of sloth but reverence perhaps,
give me who burn in thirst and fire your answer.

I'm not alone in needing your response;
for all these shades thirst so for it--more than
an Indian or Ethiopian

thirsts for cool water. Tell us how you can--
as if you're not yet caught within death's net--
make of yourself a wall against the sun."

Thus one of them had spoken to me; I
should now have answered clearly, had I not
been fixed on something strangely evident;

for in the middle of the burning path,
came people moving opposite to these--
and I, since they moved left, stared in suspense.

There, on all sides, I can see every shade
move quickly to embrace another shade,
content--they did not pause--with their brief greeting,

as ants, in their dark company, will touch
their muzzles, each to each, perhaps to seek
news of their fortunes and their journeyings.

No sooner is their friendly greeting done
than each shade tries to outcry all the rest
even before he starts to move ahead,

the new group shouting: "Sodom and Gomorrah";
the other: "That the bull may hurry toward
her lust, Pasiphae hides in the cow."

Then, just like cranes, of whom a part, to flee
the sun, fly north to Riphean mountains, while
the rest, to flee the frost, fly toward the sands,

one group moves with--the other opposite--us;
and they return with tears to their first chants
and to the shout appropriate to each.

And those who had entreated me came close
again, in the same way they'd done before;
their faces showed how keen they were to listen.

I, seeing their desire once again,
began: "O souls who can be sure of gaining
the state of peace, whenever that may be,

my limbs--mature or green--have not been left
within the world beyond; they're here with me,
together with their blood and with their bones.

That I be blind no longer, through this place
I pass; above, a lady has gained grace
for me; therefore, I bear my mortal body

across your world. So may your deepest longing
soon be appeased and you be lodged within
the heaven that's most full of love, most spacious,

please tell me, so that I may yet transcribe it
upon my pages, who you are, and what
crowd moves in the direction opposite."

Each shade displayed no less astonishment
or less confusion than a mountaineer,
who, even as he stares about, falls silent

when, rough and rustic, he comes to the city;
but when they'd set aside astonishment--
that's soon subdued in noble hearts--he who

had questioned me before, began again:
"Blessed are you who would, in order to
die better, store experience of our lands!

The people moving opposite us shared
the sin for which once, while in triumph, Caesar
heard ‘Queen' called out against him; that is why,

as they move off from us, they cry out ‘Sodom,'
reproaching their own selves, as you have heard,
and through their shame abet the fire's work.

Our sin was with the other sex; but since
we did not keep the bounds of human law,
but served our appetites like beasts, when we

part from the other ranks, we then repeat,
to our disgrace, the name of one who, in
the bestial planks, became herself a beast.

You now know why we act so, and you know
what our sins were; if you would know our names,
time is too short, and I don't know them all.

But with regard to me, I'll satisfy
your wish to know: I'm Guido Guinizzelli,
purged here because I grieved before my end."

As, after the sad raging of Lycurgus,
two sons, finding their mother, had embraced her,
so I desired to do--but dared not to--

when I heard him declare his name: the father
of me and of the others--those, my betters--
who ever used sweet, gracious rhymes of love.

And without hearing, speaking, pensive, I
walked on, still gazing at him, a long time,
prevented by the fire from drawing closer.

When I had fed my sight on him, I offered
myself--with such a pledge that others must
believe--completely ready for his service.

And he to me: "Because of what I hear,
you leave a trace within me--one so clear,
Lethe itself can't blur or cancel it.

But if your words have now sworn truthfully,
do tell me why it is that you have shown
in speech and gaze that I am dear to you."

And I to him: "It's your sweet lines that, for
as long as modern usage lasts, will still
make dear their very inks." "Brother," he said,

"he there, whom I point out to you"--he showed
us one who walked ahead--"he was a better
artisan of the mother tongue, surpassing

all those who wrote their poems of love or prose
romances--let the stupid ones contend,
who think that from Limoges there came the best.

They credit rumor rather than the truth,
allowing their opinion to be set
before they hear what art or reason says.

So, many of our fathers once persisted,
voice after voice, in giving to Guittone
the prize--but then, with most, the truth prevailed.

Now if you are so amply privileged
that you will be admitted to the cloister
where Christ is abbot of the college, then

pray say, for me, to Him, a Paternoster--
that is, as much of it as those in this
place need, since we have lost the power to sin."

Then, to make place, perhaps, for those behind him,
he disappeared into the fire, just as
a fish, through water, plunges toward the bottom.

Saying that my desire was making ready
a place of welcome for his name, I moved
ahead a little, toward the one who had

been pointed out to me. And he spoke freely:
"So does your courteous request please me--
I neither could nor would conceal myself

from you. I am Arnaut, who, going, weep
and sing; with grief, I see my former folly;
with joy, I see the hoped--for day draw near.

Now, by the Power that conducts you to
the summit of the stairway, I pray you:
remember, at time opportune, my pain!"

Then, in the fire that refines, he hid.

## 27

Just as, there where its Maker shed His blood,
the sun shed its first rays, and Ebro lay
beneath high Libra, and the ninth hour's rays

were scorching Ganges' waves; so here, the sun
stood at the point of day's departure when
God's angel--happy--showed himself to us.

He stood along the edge, beyond the flames,
singing "Beati mundo corde" in
a voice that had more life than ours can claim.

Then: "Holy souls, you cannot move ahead
unless the fire has stung you first: enter
the flames, and don't be deaf to song you'll hear

beyond," he said when we were close to him;
and when I heard him say this, I became
like one who has been laid within the grave.

I joined my hands and stretched them out to fend
the flames, watching the fire, imagining
clearly the human bodies I'd once seen

burning. My gentle escorts turned to me,
and Virgil said: "My son, though there may be
suffering here, there is no death. Remember,

remember! If I guided you to safety
even upon the back of Geryon,
then now, closer to God, what shall I do?

Be sure: although you were to spend a full
one thousand years within this fire's center,
your head would not be balder by one hair.

And if you think I am deceiving you,
draw closer to the flames, let your own hands
try out, within the fire, your clothing's hem--

put down, by now put down, your every fear;
turn toward the fire, and enter, confident!"
But I was stubborn, set against my conscience.

When he saw me still halting, obstinate,
he said, somewhat perplexed: "Now see, son: this
wall stands between you and your Beatrice."

As, at the name of Thisbe, Pyramus,
about to die, opened his eyes, and saw her
(when then the mulberry became bloodred),

so, when my stubbornness had softened, I,
hearing the name that's always flowering
within my mind, turned to my knowing guide.

At which he shook his head and said: "And would
you have us stay along this side?"--then smiled
as one smiles at a child fruit has beguiled.

Then he, ahead of me, entered the fire;
and he asked Statius, who had walked between us
before, dividing us, to go behind.

No sooner was I in that fire than I'd
have thrown myself in molten glass to find
coolness--because those flames were so intense.

My gentle father, who would comfort me,
kept talking, as we walked, of Beatrice,
saying: "I seem to see her eyes already."

A voice that sang beyond us was our guide;
and we, attentive to that voice, emerged
just at the point where it began to climb.

"Venite, benedicti Patris mei,"
it sang within a light that overcame me:
I could not look at such intensity.

"The sun departs," it added; "evening comes;
don't stay your steps, but hurry on before
the west grows dark." The path we took climbed straight

within the rock, and its direction was
such that, in front of me, my body blocked
the rays of sun, already low behind us.

And we had only tried a few steps when
I and my sages sensed the sun had set
because the shadow I had cast was spent.

Before one color came to occupy
that sky in all of its immensity
and night was free to summon all its darkness,

each of us made one of those stairs his bed:
the nature of the mountain had so weakened
our power and desire to climb ahead.

Like goats that, when they grazed, were swift and tameless
along the mountain peaks, but now are sated,
and rest and ruminate--while the sun blazes--

untroubled, in the shadows, silently,
watched over by the herdsman as he leans
upon his staff and oversees their peace;

or like the herdsman in the open fields,
spending the night beside his quiet flock,
watching to see that no beast drives them off;

such were all three of us at that point--they
were like the herdsmen, I was like the goat;
upon each side of us, high rock walls rose.

From there, one saw but little of the sky,
but in that little, I could see the stars
brighter and larger than they usually are.

But while I watched the stars, in reverie,
sleep overcame me--sleep, which often sees,
before it happens, what is yet to be.

It was the hour, I think, when Cytherea,
who always seems aflame with fires of love,
first shines upon the mountains from the east,

that, in my dream, I seemed to see a woman
both young and fair; along a plain she gathered
flowers, and even as she sang, she said:

"Whoever asks my name, know that I'm Leah,
and I apply my lovely hands to fashion
a garland of the flowers I have gathered.

To find delight within this mirror I
adorn myself; whereas my sister Rachel
never deserts her mirror; there she sits

all day; she longs to see her fair eyes gazing,
as I, to see my hands adorning, long:
she is content with seeing, I with labor."

And now, with the reflected lights that glow
before the dawn and, rising, are most welcome
to pilgrims as, returning, they near home,

the shadows fled upon all sides; my sleep
fled with them; and at this, I woke and saw
that the great teachers had already risen.

"Today your hungerings will find their peace
through that sweet fruit the care of mortals seeks
among so many branches." This, the speech,

the solemn words, that Virgil spoke to me;
and there were never tidings to compare,
in offering delight to me, with these.

My will on will to climb above was such
that at each step I took I felt the force
within my wings was growing for the flight.

When all the staircase lay beneath us and
we'd reached the highest step, then Virgil set
his eyes insistently on me and said:

"My son, you've seen the temporary fire
and the eternal fire; you have reached
the place past which my powers cannot see.

I've brought you here through intellect and art;
from now on, let your pleasure be your guide;
you're past the steep and past the narrow paths.

Look at the sun that shines upon your brow;
look at the grasses, flowers, and the shrubs
born here, spontaneously, of the earth.

Among them, you can rest or walk until
the coming of the glad and lovely eyes--
those eyes that, weeping, sent me to your side.

Await no further word or sign from me:
your will is free, erect, and whole--to act
against that will would be to err: therefore

I crown and miter you over yourself."

## 28


Now keen to search within, to search around
that forest--dense, alive with green, divine--
which tempered the new day before my eyes,

without delay, I left behind the rise
and took the plain, advancing slowly, slowly
across the ground where every part was fragrant.

A gentle breeze, which did not seem to vary
within itself, was striking at my brow
but with no greater force than a kind wind's,

a wind that made the trembling boughs--they all
bent eagerly--incline in the direction
of morning shadows from the holy mountain;

but they were not deflected with such force
as to disturb the little birds upon
the branches in the practice of their arts;

for to the leaves, with song, birds welcomed those
first hours of the morning joyously,
and leaves supplied the burden to their rhymes--

just like the wind that sounds from branch to branch
along the shore of Classe, through the pines
when Aeolus has set Sirocco loose.

Now, though my steps were slow, I'd gone so far
into the ancient forest that I could
no longer see where I had made my entry;

and there I came upon a stream that blocked
the path of my advance; its little waves
bent to the left the grass along its banks.

All of the purest waters here on earth,
when matched against that stream, would seem to be
touched by impurity; it hides no thing--

that stream--although it moves, dark, dark, beneath
the never--ending shadows, which allow
no ray of sun or moon to reach those waters.

I halted, and I set my eyes upon
the farther bank, to look at the abundant
variety of newly--flowered boughs;

and there, just like a thing that, in appearing
most suddenly, repels all other thoughts,
so great is the astonishment it brings,

I saw a solitary woman moving,
singing, and gathering up flower on flower--
the flowers that colored all of her pathway.

"I pray you, lovely lady, you who warm
yourself with rays of love, if I may trust
your looks--which often evidence the heart--

may it please you," I asked of her, "to move
ahead and closer to this river, so
that I may understand what you are singing.

You have reminded me of where and what--
just when her mother was deprived of her
and she deprived of spring--Proserpina was."

As, when she turns, a woman, dancing, keeps
her soles close to the ground and to each other
and scarcely lets one foot precede the other,

so did she turn, upon the little red
and yellow flowers, to me, no differently
than would a virgin, lowering chaste eyes.

I had beseeched, and I was satisfied,
for she approached so close that the sweet sound
that reached me then became intelligible.

No sooner had she reached the point where that
fair river's waves could barely bathe the grass,
than she gave me this gift: lifting her eyes.

I do not think a light so bright had shone
beneath the lids of Venus when her son
pierced her in extraordinary fashion.

Erect, along the farther bank, she smiled,
her hands entwining varicolored flowers,
which that high land, needing no seed, engenders.

The river kept us just three steps apart;
but even Hellespont, where Xerxes crossed--
a case that still curbs all men's arrogance--

did not provoke more hatred in Leander
when rough seas ran from Abydos to Sestos,
than hatred I bestowed upon that river

when it refused to open. She began:
"You are new here and may--because I smile
in this place, chosen to be mankind's nest--

wonder, perplexed, unable to detect
the cause; but light to clear your intellect
is in the psalm beginning ‘Delectasti.'

And you, who have stepped forward, who beseeched me,
tell me if you'd hear more; I have come ready
for all your questions till you're satisfied."

I said: "The water and the murmuring forest
contend, in me, against the recent credence
I gave to words denying their existence."

At this, she said: "I'll tell you how the source
of your amazement has its special cause;
I'll clear the cloud that's left you so distraught.

The Highest Good, whose sole joy is Himself,
made man to be--and to enact--good; He
gave man this place as pledge of endless peace.

Man's fault made brief his stay here; and man's fault
made him exchange frank laughter and sweet sport
for lamentation and for anxiousness.

Below this mountain, land and water vapors,
which follow heat as far as they are able,
produce their perturbations; to prevent

them from molesting man placed here, this mountain
rose up this close to Heaven; from the point
where its gate locks, it's free of such disturbance.

Now, since all of the atmosphere revolves
within a circle, moved by the first circling,
unless its round is broken at some point,

against this height, which stands completely free
within the living air, that motion strikes;
and since these woods are dense, they echo it.

And when a plant is struck, its power is such
that it impregnates air with seeding force;
the air, revolving, casts this seed abroad;

the other hemisphere, depending on
the nature of its land and sky, conceives
and bears, from diverse powers, diverse trees.

If what I've said were known, you would not need
to be amazed on earth when growing things
take root but have no seed that can be seen.

And you must know: the holy plain on which
you find yourself is full of every seed;
and it has fruit that--there--cannot be gathered.

The water that you see does not spring from
a vein that vapor--cold--condensed--restores,
like rivers that acquire or lose their force;

it issues from a pure and changeless fountain,
which by the will of God regains as much
as, on two sides, it pours and it divides.

On this side it descends with power to end
one's memory of sin; and on the other,
it can restore recall of each good deed.

To one side, it is Lethe; on the other,
Eunoe; neither stream is efficacious
unless the other's waters have been tasted:

their savor is above all other sweetness.
Although your thirst might well be satisfied
even if I revealed no more to you,

I'll give you freely, too, a corollary;
nor do I think my words will be less welcome
to you if they extend beyond my promise.

Those ancients who in poetry presented
the golden age, who sang its happy state,
perhaps, in their Parnassus, dreamt this place.

Here, mankind's root was innocent; and here
were every fruit and never--ending spring;
these streams--the nectar of which poets sing."

Then I turned round completely, and I faced
my poets; I could see that they had heard
with smiles this final corollary spoken;

that done, my eyes returned to the fair woman.

## 29

Her words were done, but without interruption
she sang--like an enamored woman--thus:
"Beati quorum tecta sunt peccata!"

And just as nymphs who used to walk alone
among the woodland shadows, some desiring
to see and some to flee the sun, so she

moved countercurrent as she walked along
the riverbank; and following her short
footsteps with my own steps, I matched her pace.

Her steps and mine together did not sum
one hundred when the banks, still parallel,
so curved about that I was facing east.

Nor had we gone much farther on that path
when she turned fully round toward me and said:
"My brother, look and listen"; and I saw

a sudden radiance that swept across
the mighty forest on all sides--and I
was wondering if lightning had not struck.

But since, when lightning strikes, it stops at once,
while that light, lingering, increased its force,
within my mind I asked: "What thing is this?"

And through the incandescent air there ran
sweet melody; at which, just indignation
made me rebuke the arrogance of Eve

because, where earth and heaven were obedient,
a solitary woman, just created,
found any veil at all beyond endurance;

if she had been devout beneath her veil,
I should have savored those ineffable
delights before, and for a longer time.

While I moved on, completely rapt, among
so many first fruits of eternal pleasure,
and longing for still greater joys, the air

before us altered underneath the green
branches, becoming like an ardent fire,
and now the sweet sound was distinctly song.

O Virgins, sacrosanct, if I have ever,
for your sake, suffered vigils, cold, and hunger,
great need makes me entreat my recompense.

Now Helicon must pour its fountains for me,
Urania must help me with her choir
to put in verses things hard to conceive.

Not far beyond, we made out seven trees
of gold, though the long stretch of air between
those trees and us had falsified their semblance;

but when I'd drawn so close that things perceived
through mingled senses, which delude, did not,
now they were nearer, lose their real features,

the power that offers reason matter judged
those trees to be--what they were--candelabra,
and what those voices sang to be "Hosanna."

The upper part of those fair candles flamed
more radiantly than the midmonth moon
shines at midnight in an untroubled sky.

Full of astonishment, I turned to my
good Virgil; but he only answered me
with eyes that were no less amazed than mine.

Then I looked at the extraordinary
things that were moving toward us--but so slowly
that even brides just wed would move more quickly.

The woman chided me: "Why are you only
so eager to behold the living lights
and not in seeing what comes after them?"

Then I saw people following those candles,
as if behind their guides, and they wore white--
whiteness that, in this world, has never been.

The water, to my left, reflected flames,
and it reflected, too, my left--hand side
if I gazed into it, as in a mirror.

When I was at a point along my shore
where all that sundered me from them was water,
I stayed my steps in order to see better,

and I could see the candle flames move forward,
leaving the air behind them colored like
the strokes a painter's brush might have described,

so that the air above that retinue
was streaked with seven bands in every hue
of which the rainbow's made and Delia's girdle.

These pennants stretched far back, beyond my vision;
as for the width they filled, I judged the distance
between the outer ones to be ten paces.

Beneath the handsome sky I have described,
twenty--four elders moved on, two by two,
and they had wreaths of lilies on their heads.

And all were singing: "You, among the daughters
of Adam, benedicta are; and may
your beauties blessed be eternally."

After the flowers and the other fresh
plants facing me, along the farther shore,
had seen those chosen people disappear,

then--as in heaven, star will follow star--
the elders gone, four animals came on;
and each of them had green leaves as his crown;

each had six wings as plumage, and those plumes
were full of eyes; they would be very like
the eyes of Argus, were his eyes alive.

Reader, I am not squandering more rhymes
in order to describe their forms; since I
must spend elsewhere, I can't be lavish here;

but read Ezekiel, for he has drawn
those animals approaching from the north;
with wings and cloud and fire, he painted them.

And just as you will find them in his pages,
such were they here, except that John's with me
as to their wings; with him, John disagrees.

The space between the four of them contained
a chariot--triumphal--on two wheels,
tied to a griffin's neck and drawn by him.

His wings, stretched upward, framed the middle band
with three bands on each outer side, so that,
though he cleaved air, he left the bands intact.

His wings--so high that they were lost to sight;
his limbs were gold as far as he was bird;
the rest of him was white mixed with bloodred.

Not only did no chariot so handsome
gladden Rome's Africanus or Augustus
himself--even the Sun's own cannot match it;

the Sun's--which, gone astray, was burnt to cinders
because Earth offered up her pious prayers,
when Jove, in ways not known to us, was just.

Three circling women, then advancing, danced:
at the right wheel; the first of them, so red
that even in a flame she'd not be noted;

the second seemed as if her flesh and bone
were fashioned out of emerald; the third
seemed to be newly fallen snow. And now

the white one seemed to lead them, now the red;
and from the way in which the leader chanted,
the others took their pace, now slow, now rapid.

Upon the left, four other women, dressed
in crimson, danced, depending on the cadence
of one of them, with three eyes in her head.

Behind all of the group I have described
I saw two elders, different in their dress
but like in manner--grave and decorous.

The first seemed to be one of the disciples
of great Hippocrates, whom nature made
for those who are her dearest living beings;

the other showed an opposite concern--
his sword was bright and sharp, and even on
this near side of the river, I felt fear.

Then I saw four of humble aspect; and,
when all the rest had passed, a lone old man,
his features keen, advanced, as if in sleep.

The clothes these seven wore were like the elders'
in the first file, except that these had no
garlands of lilies round their brow; instead,

roses and other red flowers wreathed their heads;
one seeing them less closely would have sworn
that all of them had flames above their eyebrows.

And when the chariot stood facing me,
I heard a bolt of thunder; and it seemed
to block the path of that good company,

which halted there, its emblems in the lead.

## 30

When the first heaven's Seven--Stars had halted
(those stars that never rise or set, that are
not veiled except when sin beclouds our vision;

those stars that, there, made everyone aware
of what his duty was, just as the Bear
below brings helmsmen home to harbor), then

the truthful band that had come first between
the griffin and the Seven--Stars turned toward
that chariot as toward their peace, and one

of them, as if sent down from Heaven, hymned
aloud, " Veni, sponsa, de Libano,"
three times, and all the others echoed him.

Just as the blessed, at the Final Summons,
will rise up--ready--each out of his grave,
singing, with new--clothed voices, Alleluia,

so, from the godly chariot, eternal
life's messengers and ministers arose:
one hundred stood ad vocem tanti senis.

All of them cried: "Benedictus qui venis,"
and, scattering flowers upward and around,
"Manibus, oh, date lilia plenis."

I have at times seen all the eastern sky
becoming rose as day began and seen,
adorned in lovely blue, the rest of heaven;

and seen the sun's face rise so veiled that it
was tempered by the mist and could permit
the eye to look at length upon it; so,

within a cloud of flowers that were cast
by the angelic hands and then rose up
and then fell back, outside and in the chariot,

a woman showed herself to me; above
a white veil, she was crowned with olive boughs;
her cape was green; her dress beneath, flame--red.

Within her presence, I had once been used
to feeling--trembling--wonder, dissolution;
but that was long ago. Still, though my soul,

now she was veiled, could not see her directly,
by way of hidden force that she could move,
I felt the mighty power of old love.

As soon as that deep force had struck my vision
(the power that, when I had not yet left
my boyhood, had already transfixed me),

I turned around and to my left--just as
a little child, afraid or in distress,
will hurry to his mother--anxiously,

to say to Virgil: "I am left with less
than one drop of my blood that does not tremble:
I recognize the signs of the old flame."

But Virgil had deprived us of himself,
Virgil, the gentlest father, Virgil, he
to whom I gave my self for my salvation;

and even all our ancient mother lost
was not enough to keep my cheeks, though washed
with dew, from darkening again with tears.

"Dante, though Virgil's leaving you, do not
yet weep, do not weep yet; you'll need your tears
for what another sword must yet inflict."

Just like an admiral who goes to stern
and prow to see the officers who guide
the other ships, encouraging their tasks;

so, on the left side of the chariot
(I'd turned around when I had heard my name--
which, of necessity, I transcribe here),

I saw the lady who had first appeared
to me beneath the veils of the angelic
flowers look at me across the stream.

Although the veil she wore--down from her head,
which was encircled by Minerva's leaves--
did not allow her to be seen distinctly,

her stance still regal and disdainful, she
continued, just as one who speaks but keeps
until the end the fiercest parts of speech:

"Look here! For I am Beatrice, I am!
How were you able to ascend the mountain?
Did you not know that man is happy here?"

My lowered eyes caught sight of the clear stream,
but when I saw myself reflected there,
such shame weighed on my brow, my eyes drew back

and toward the grass; just as a mother seems
harsh to her child, so did she seem to me--
how bitter is the savor of stern pity!

Her words were done. The angels--suddenly--
sang, "In te, Domine, speravi"; but
their singing did not go past "pedes meos."

Even as snow among the sap--filled trees
along the spine of Italy will freeze
when gripped by gusts of the Slavonian winds,

then, as it melts, will trickle through itself--
that is, if winds breathe north from shade--less lands--
just as, beneath the flame, the candle melts;

so I, before I'd heard the song of those
whose notes always accompany the notes
of the eternal spheres, was without tears

and sighs; but when I heard the sympathy
for me within their gentle harmonies,
as if they'd said: "Lady, why shame him so?"--

then did the ice that had restrained my heart
become water and breath; and from my breast
and through my lips and eyes they issued--anguished.

Still standing motionless upon the left
side of the chariot, she then addressed
the angels who had been compassionate:

"You are awake in never--ending day,
and neither night nor sleep can steal from you
one step the world would take along its way;

therefore, I'm more concerned that my reply
be understood by him who weeps beyond,
so that his sorrow's measure match his sin.

Not only through the work of the great spheres--
which guide each seed to a determined end,
depending on what stars are its companions--

but through the bounty of the godly graces,
which shower down from clouds so high that we
cannot approach them with our vision, he,

when young, was such--potentially--that any
propensity innate in him would have
prodigiously succeeded, had he acted.

But where the soil has finer vigor, there
precisely--when untilled or badly seeded--
will that terrain grow wilder and more noxious.

My countenance sustained him for a while;
showing my youthful eyes to him, I led
him with me toward the way of righteousness.

As soon as I, upon the threshold of
my second age, had changed my life, he took
himself away from me and followed after

another; when, from flesh to spirit, I
had risen, and my goodness and my beauty
had grown, I was less dear to him, less welcome:

he turned his footsteps toward an untrue path;
he followed counterfeits of goodness, which
will never pay in full what they have promised.

Nor did the inspirations I received--
with which, in dream and otherwise, I called
him back--help me; he paid so little heed!

He fell so far there were no other means
to lead him to salvation, except this:
to let him see the people who were lost.

For this I visited the gateway of
the dead; to him who guided him above
my prayers were offered even as I wept.

The deep design of God would have been broken
if Lethe had been crossed and he had drunk
such waters but had not discharged the debt

of penitence that's paid when tears are shed."

## 31

"O you upon the holy stream's far shore,"
so she, turning her speech's point against me--
even its edge had seemed too sharp--began

again, without allowing interruption,
"tell, tell if this is true; for your confession
must be entwined with such self-accusation."

My power of speech was so confounded that
my voice would move and yet was spent before
its organs had released it. She forbore

a moment, then she said: "What are you thinking?
Reply to me, the water has not yet
obliterated your sad memories."

Confusion mixed with fear compelled a Yes
out of my mouth, and yet that Yes was such--
one needed eyes to make out what it was.

Just as a crossbow that is drawn too taut
snaps both its cord and bow when it is shot,
and arrow meets its mark with feeble force,

so, caught beneath that heavy weight, I burst;
and I let tears and sighs pour forth; my voice
had lost its life along its passage out.

At this she said: "In the desire for me
that was directing you to love the Good
beyond which there's no thing to draw our longing,

what chains were strung, what ditches dug across
your path that, once you'd come upon them, caused
your loss of any hope of moving forward?"

What benefits and what allurements were
so evident upon the brow of others
that you had need to promenade before them?"

After I had withheld a bitter sigh,
I scarcely had the voice for my reply,
but, laboring, my lips gave my words form.

Weeping, I answered: "Mere appearances
turned me aside with their false loveliness,
as soon as I had lost your countenance."

And she: "Had you been silent or denied
what you confess, your guilt would not be less
in evidence: it's known by such a Judge!

But when the charge of sinfulness has burst
from one's own cheek, then in our court the whet--
stone turns and blunts our blade's own cutting edge.

Nevertheless, that you may feel more shame
for your mistake, and that--in time to come--
hearing the Sirens, you may be more strong,

have done with all the tears you sowed, and listen:
so shall you hear how, unto other ends,
my buried flesh should have directed you.

Nature or art had never showed you any
beauty that matched the lovely limbs in which
I was enclosed--limbs scattered now in dust;

and if the highest beauty failed you through
my death, what mortal thing could then induce
you to desire it? For when the first

arrow of things deceptive struck you, then
you surely should have lifted up your wings
to follow me, no longer such a thing.

No green young girl or other novelty--
such brief delight--should have weighed down your wings,
awaiting further shafts. The fledgling bird

must meet two or three blows before he learns,
but any full-fledged bird is proof against
the net that has been spread or arrow, aimed."

As children, when ashamed, will stand, their eyes
upon the ground--they listen, silently,
acknowledging their fault repentantly--

so did I stand; and she enjoined me: "Since
hearing alone makes you grieve so, lift up
your beard, and sight will bring you greater tears."

There's less resistance in the sturdy oak
to its uprooting by a wind from lands
of ours or lands of Iarbas than I showed

in lifting up my chin at her command;
I knew quite well--when she said "beard" but meant
my face--the poison in her argument.

When I had raised my face upright, my eyes
were able to perceive that the first creatures
had paused and were no longer scattering flowers;

and still uncertain of itself, my vision
saw Beatrice turned toward the animal
that is, with its two natures, but one person.

Beneath her veil, beyond the stream, she seemed
so to surpass her former self in beauty
as, here on earth, she had surpassed all others.

The nettle of remorse so stung me then,
that those--among all other--things that once
most lured my love, became most hateful to me.

Such self-indictment seized my heart that I
collapsed, my senses slack; what I became
is known to her who was the cause of it.

Then, when my heart restored my outer sense,
I saw the woman whom I'd found alone,
standing above me, saying: "Hold, hold me!"

She'd plunged me, up to my throat, in the river,
and, drawing me behind her, she now crossed,
light as a gondola, along the surface.

When I was near the blessed shore, I heard
"Asperges me" so sweetly sung that I
cannot remember or, much less, transcribe it.

The lovely woman opened wide her arms;
she clasped my head, and then she thrust me under
to that point where I had to swallow water.

That done, she drew me out and led me, bathed,
into the dance of the four lovely women;
and each one placed her arm above my head.

"Here we are nymphs; in heaven, stars; before
she had descended to the world, we were
assigned, as her handmaids, to Beatrice;

we'll be your guides unto her eyes; but it
will be the three beyond, who see more deeply,
who'll help you penetrate her joyous light."

So, singing, they began; then, leading me
together with them to the griffin's breast,
where Beatrice, turned toward us, stood, they said:

"See that you are not sparing of your gaze:
before you we have set those emeralds
from which Love once had aimed his shafts at you."

A thousand longings burning more than flames
compelled my eyes to watch the radiant eyes
that, motionless, were still fixed on the griffin.

Just like the sun within a mirror, so
the double-natured creature gleamed within,
now showing one, and now the other guise.

Consider, reader, if I did not wonder
when I saw something that displayed no movement
though its reflected image kept on changing.

And while, full of astonishment and gladness,
my soul tasted that food which, even as
it quenches hunger, spurs the appetite,

the other three, whose stance showed them to be
the members of a higher troop, advanced--
and, to their chant, they danced angelically.

"Turn, Beatrice, o turn your holy eyes
upon your faithful one," their song beseeched,
"who, that he might see you, has come so far.

Out of your grace, do us this grace; unveil
your lips to him, so that he may discern
the second beauty you have kept concealed."

O splendor of eternal living light,
who's ever grown so pale beneath Parnassus'
shade or has drunk so deeply from its fountain,

that he'd not seem to have his mind confounded,
trying to render you as you appeared
where heaven's harmony was your pale likeness--

your face, seen through the air, unveiled completely?

## 32

My eyes were so insistent, so intent
on finding satisfaction for their ten--
year thirst that every other sense was spent.

And to each side, my eyes were walled in by
indifference to all else (with its old net,
the holy smile so drew them to itself),

when I was forced to turn my eyes leftward
by those three goddesses because I heard
them warning me: "You stare too fixedly."

And the condition that afflicts the sight
when eyes have just been struck by the sun's force
left me without my vision for a time.

But when my sight became accustomed to
lesser sensations (that is, lesser than
the mighty force that made my eyes retreat),

I saw the glorious army: it had wheeled
around and to the right; it had turned east;
it faced the seven flames and faced the sun.

Just as, protected by its shields, a squadron
will wheel, to save itself, around its standard
until all of its men have changed direction;

so here all troops of the celestial kingdom
within the vanguard passed in front of us
before the chariot swung around the pole--shaft.

Back to the wheels the ladies then returned;
and though the griffin moved the blessed burden,
when he did that, none of his feathers stirred.

The lovely lady who'd helped me ford Lethe,
and I and Statius, following the wheel
that turned right, round the inner, smaller arc,

were slowly passing through the tall woods--empty
because of one who had believed the serpent;
our pace was measured by angelic song.

The space we covered could be matched perhaps
by three flights of an unleashed arrow's shafts,
when Beatrice descended from the chariot.

"Adam," I heard all of them murmuring,
and then they drew around a tree whose every
branch had been stripped of flowers and of leaves.

As it grows higher, so its branches spread
wider; it reached a height that even in
their forests would amaze the Indians.

"Blessed are you, whose beak does not, o griffin,
pluck the sweet--tasting fruit that is forbidden
and then afflicts the belly that has eaten!"

So, round the robust tree, the others shouted;
and the two-natured animal: "Thus is
the seed of every righteous man preserved."

And turning to the pole--shaft he had pulled,
he drew it to the foot of the stripped tree
and, with a branch of that tree, tied the two.

Just like our plants that, when the great light falls
on earth, mixed with the light that shines behind
the stars of the celestial Fishes, swell

with buds--each plant renews its coloring
before the sun has yoked its steeds beneath
another constellation: so the tree,

whose boughs--before--had been so solitary,
was now renewed, showing a tint that was
less than the rose, more than the violet.

I did not understand the hymn that they
then sang--it is not sung here on this earth--
nor, drowsy, did I listen to the end.

Could I describe just how the ruthless eyes
(eyes whose long wakefulness cost them so dear),
hearing the tale of Syrinx, fell asleep,

then like a painter painting from a model,
I'd draw the way in which I fell asleep;
but I refrain--let one more skillful paint.

I move, therefore, straight to my waking time;
I say that radiance rent the veil of sleep,
as did a voice: "Rise up: what are you doing?"

Even as Peter, John, and James, when brought
to see the blossoms of the apple tree--
whose fruit abets the angels' hungering,

providing endless wedding-feasts in Heaven--
were overwhelmed by what they saw, but then,
hearing the word that shattered deeper sleeps,

arose and saw their fellowship was smaller--
since Moses and Elijah now had left--
and saw a difference in their Teacher's dress;

so I awoke and saw, standing above me,
she who before--compassionate--had guided
my steps along the riverbank. Completely

bewildered, I asked: "Where is Beatrice?"
And she: "Beneath the boughs that were renewed,
she's seated on the root of that tree; see

the company surrounding her; the rest
have left; behind the griffin they have climbed
on high with song that is more sweet, more deep."

I do not know if she said more than that,
because, by now, I had in sight one who
excluded all things other from my view.

She sat alone upon the simple ground,
left there as guardian of the chariot
I'd seen the two-form animal tie fast.

The seven nymphs encircled her as garland,
and in their hands they held the lamps that can
not be extinguished by the north or south winds.

"Here you shall be--awhile--a visitor;
but you shall be with me--and without end--
Rome's citizen, the Rome in which Christ is

Roman; and thus, to profit that world which
lives badly, watch the chariot steadfastly
and, when you have returned beyond, transcribe

what you have seen." Thus, Beatrice; and I,
devoutly, at the feet of her commandments,
set mind and eyes where she had wished me to.

Never has lightning fallen with such swift
motion from a thick cloud, when it descends
from the most distant limit in the heavens,

as did the bird of Jove that I saw swoop
down through the tree, tearing the bark as well
as the new leaves and the new flowering.

It struck the chariot with all its force;
the chariot twisted, like a ship that's crossed
by seas that now storm starboard and now port.

I then saw, as it leaped into the body
of that triumphal chariot, a fox
that seemed to lack all honest nourishment:

but, as she railed against its squalid sins,
my lady forced that fox to flight as quick
as, stripped of flesh, its bones permitted it.

Then I could see the eagle plunge--again
down through the tree--into the chariot
and leave it feathered with its plumage; and,

just like a voice from an embittered heart,
a voice issued from Heaven, saying this:
"O my small bark, your freight is wickedness!"

Then did the ground between the two wheels seem
to me to open; from the earth, a dragon
emerged; it drove its tail up through the chariot;

and like a wasp when it retracts its sting,
drawing its venomed tail back to itself,
it dragged part of the bottom off, and went

its way, undulating. And what was left
was covered with the eagle's plumes--perhaps
offered with sound and kind intent--much as

grass covers fertile ground; and the pole--shaft
and both wheels were re--covered in less time
than mouth must be kept open when one sighs.

Transfigured so, the saintly instrument
grew heads, which sprouted from its parts; three grew
upon the pole--shaft, and one at each corner.

The three were horned like oxen, but the four
had just a single horn upon their foreheads:
such monsters never have been seen before.

Just like a fortress set on a steep slope,
securely seated there, ungirt, a whore,
whose eyes were quick to rove, appeared to me;

and I saw at her side, erect, a giant,
who seemed to serve as her custodian;
and they--again, again--embraced each other.

But when she turned her wandering, wanton eyes
to me, then that ferocious amador
beat her from head to foot; then, swollen with

suspicion, fierce with anger, he untied
the chariot--made--monster, dragging it
into the wood, so that I could not see

either the whore or the strange chariot-beast.

## 33

Weeping, the women then began--now three,
now four, alternately--to psalm gently,
"Deus venerunt gentes"; and at this,

sighing and full of pity, Beatrice
was changed; she listened, grieving little less
than Mary when, beneath the Cross, she wept.

But when the seven virgins had completed
their psalm, and she was free to speak, erect,
her coloring like ardent fire, she answered:

"Modicum, et non videbitis me
et iterum sisters delightful to me,
modicum, et vos videbitis me."

Then she set all the seven nymphs in front
of her and signaled me, the lady, and
the sage who had remained, to move behind her.

So she advanced; and I do not believe
that she had taken her tenth step upon
the ground before her eyes had struck my eyes;

and gazing tranquilly, "Pray come more quickly,"
she said to me, "so that you are more ready
to listen to me should I speak to you."

As soon as I, responding to my duty,
had joined her, she said: "Brother, why not try,
since now you're at my side, to query me?"

Like those who, speaking to superiors
too reverently do not speak distinctly,
not drawing their clear voice up to their teeth--

so did I speak with sound too incomplete
when I began: "Lady, you know my need
to know, and know how it can be appeased."

And she to me: "I'd have you disentangle
yourself, from this point on, from fear and shame,
that you no longer speak like one who dreams.

Know that the vessel which the serpent broke
was and is not; but he whose fault it is
may rest assured--God's vengeance fears no hindrance.

The eagle that had left its plumes within
the chariot, which then became a monster
and then a prey, will not forever be

without an heir; for I can plainly see,
and thus I tell it: stars already close
at hand, which can't be blocked or checked, will bring

a time in which, dispatched by God, a Five
Hundred and Ten and Five will slay the whore
together with that giant who sins with her.

And what I tell, as dark as Sphinx and Themis,
may leave you less convinced because--like these--
it tires the intellect with quandaries;

but soon events themselves will be the Naiads
that clarify this obstinate enigma--
but without injury to grain or herds.

Take note; and even as I speak these words,
do you transmit them in your turn to those
who live the life that is a race to death.

And when you write them, keep in mind that you
must not conceal what you've seen of the tree
that now has been despoiled twice over here.

Whoever robs or rends that tree offends,
with his blaspheming action, God; for He
created it for His sole use--holy.

For tasting of that tree, the first soul waited
five thousand years and more in grief and longing
for Him who on Himself avenged that taste.

Your intellect's asleep if it can't see
how singular's the cause that makes that tree
so tall and makes it grow invertedly.

And if, like waters of the Elsa, your
vain thoughts did not encrust your mind; if your
delight in them were not like Pyramus

staining the mulberry, you'd recognize
in that tree's form and height the moral sense
God's justice had when He forbade trespass.

But since I see your intellect is made
of stone and, petrified, grown so opaque--
the light of what I say has left you dazed--

I'd also have you bear my words within you--
if not inscribed, at least outlined--just as
the pilgrim's staff is brought back wreathed with palm."

And I: "Even as wax the seal's impressed,
where there's no alteration in the form,
so does my brain now bear what you have stamped."

But why does your desired word ascend
so high above my understanding that
the more I try, the more am I denied?"

"That you may recognize," she said, "the school
that you have followed and may see if what
it taught can comprehend what I have said--

and see that, as the earth is distant from
the highest and the swiftest of the heavens,
so distant is your way from the divine."

And I replied to her: "I don't remember
making myself a stranger to you, nor
does conscience gnaw at me because of that."

"And if you can't remember that," she answered,
smiling, "then call to mind how you--today--
have drunk of Lethe; and if smoke is proof

of fire, then it is clear: we can conclude
from this forgetfulness, that in your will
there was a fault--your will had turned elsewhere.

But from now on the words I speak will be
naked; that is appropriate if they
would be laid bare before your still--crude sight."

More incandescent now, with slower steps,
the sun was pacing the meridian,
which alters with the place from which it's seen,

when, just as one who serves as escort for
a group will halt if he has come upon
things strange or even traces of strangeness,

the seven ladies halted at the edge
of a dense shadow such as mountains cast,
beneath green leaves and black boughs, on cold banks.

In front of them I seemed to see Euphrates
and Tigris issuing from one same spring
and then, as friends do, separating slowly.

"O light, o glory of the human race,
what water is this, flowing from one source
and then becoming distant from itself?"

Her answer to what I had asked was: "Ask
Matilda to explain this"; and the lovely
lady, as one who frees herself from blame,

replied: "He's heard of this and other matters
from me; and I am sure that Lethe's waters
have not obscured his memory of this."

And Beatrice :"Perhaps some greater care,
which often weakens memory, has made
his mind, in things regarding sight, grow dark.

But see Eunoe as it flows from there:
lead him to it and, as you're used to doing,
revive the power that is faint in him."

As would the noble soul, which offers no
excuse, but makes another's will its own
as soon as signs reveal that will; just so,

when she had taken me, the lovely lady
moved forward; and she said with womanly
courtesy to Statius: "Come with him."

If, reader, I had ampler space in which
to write, I'd sing--though incompletely--that
sweet draught for which my thirst was limitless;

but since all of the pages pre-disposed
for this, the second canticle, are full,
the curb of art will not let me continue.

From that most holy wave I now returned
to Beatrice; remade, as new trees are
renewed when they bring forth new boughs, I was

pure and prepared to climb unto the stars.


